Evidence of Neutrino Enhanced Clustering in a Complete Sample of Sloan Survey Clusters,
Implying P mν = 0.119 ± 0.034 eV
Razieh Emami,1, 2, ∗Tom Broadhurst,3, 4 Pablo Jimeno,3 George Smoot,5, 6, 7 Raul Angulo,8
Jeremy Lim,9, 10 Ming Chung Chu,11 Shek Yeung,11 Zhichao Zeng,11, 12 and Ruth Lazkoz3
1Center for Astrophysics, Harvard-Smithsonian, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2 Institute for Advanced Study, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
3Department of Theoretical Physics, University of the Basque Country UPV-EHU, 48040 Bilbao, Spain
4IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Alameda Urquijo, 36-5 48008 Bilbao, Spain
5 Helmut and Anna Pao Sohmen Professor-at-Large, IAS,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, 999077 Hong Kong, China
6Paris Centre for Cosmological Physics, APC, AstroParticule et Cosmologie, Universit´e Paris Diderot,
CNRS/IN2P3, CEA/lrfu, Observatoire de Paris, Universit´e Sorbonne Paris Cit´e,
10, rue Alice Domon et Leonie Duquet, 75205 Paris CEDEX 13, France
7Physics Department and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, 94720 CA, USA
8Centro de Estudios de F sica del Cosmos de Arag on, Plaza de San Juan 1, 44001 Terue, spain
9Department of Physics, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
10Laboratory for Space Research, Faculty of Science, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kon
11Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, China
12Department of Physics, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA
The clustering amplitude of 7143 clusters from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) is found to increase with
cluster mass, closely agreeing with the Gaussian random ﬁeld hypothesis for structure formation. The amplitude
of the observed cluster correlation exceeds the predictions from pure cold dark matter (CDM) simulation by
≃6% for the standard Planck-based values of the cosmological parameters. We show that this excess can be
naturally accounted for by free streaming of light neutrinos, which opposes gravitational growth, so clusters
formed at ﬁxed mass are fewer and hence more biased than for a pure CDM density ﬁeld. An enhancement of the
cluster bias by 7% matches the observations, corresponding to a total neutrino mass, mν = 0.119 ± 0.034 eV at
67% conﬁdence level, for the standard relic neutrino density. If ongoing laboratory experiments favor a normal
neutrino mass hierarchy then we may infer a somewhat larger total mass than the minimum oscillation based
value, P mν ≃0.056eV, with 90% conﬁdence. Much higher precision can be achieved by applying our method to
a larger sample of more distant clusters with weak lensing derived masses.
PACS numbers:
INTRODUCTION
The standard picture whereby cosmic structure develops
gravitationally from a Gaussian random ﬁeld (GRF) predicts
that the amplitude of clustering should increase steadily with
density contrast [1–5]. This inherent property of a GRF is
known as the clustering “bias”, and was ﬁrst employed by [1]
to explain the approximately factor of three larger correlation
length of nearby massive galaxy clusters relative to ﬁeld galax-
ies. Subsequent N-body simulations have fully demonstrated
that collapsed halos formed from a GRF should be biased in
this fundamental way [6]. Simulations also predict that the
clustering bias should increase with redshift as halo abundance
declines with redshift, particularly for the most massive clus-
ters. The eﬀect of light neutrinos is to smooth the density
ﬁeld thereby slowing the growth of structure, thus reducing
the abundance of clusters [7] while enhancing the clustering
amplitude relative to a pure CDM density ﬁeld.
Measuring this fundamental link between halo mass and
clustering bias has not proven feasible using galaxies. Not only
are the virial masses of galaxies hard to deﬁne observationally,
but galaxy correlation functions have been found to depend
strongly on galaxy type and luminosity with a complexity that
cannot be simply linked to the growth of structure. In con-
trast, cluster masses can be directly inferred from gravitational
lensing and correlate almost linearly with the number of mem-
ber galaxies, following a clear mass-richness (MR) relation
[8, 10, 15–17].
Large surveys are now underway to realize the anticipated
sensitivity of cluster abundance to the growth of the cluster
mass function [18], including a predicted small additional sup-
pression of their numbers by neutrino free-streaming [19–21].
This suppression is claimed to be close to detection in an initial
SZ-selected sample of 370 clusters [22] and in combination
with other methods provides P mν ≲0.14ev ([25, 26]), tight-
ening the robust 95% upper limit of < 0.25 eV from the pure
Planck analysis [27]. This claimed improvement over Planck
rests on uncertain assumptions about the inherent spread in
mass of strong SZ detected clusters, as cluster collisions com-
press the gas thereby boosting the SZ signal [29, 30][28].
Here we develop and apply a clustering based method that
is sensitive to the eﬀect of neutrinos, using the correlation
length of optically detected clusters from the thoroughly tested
and currently largest and most complete survey of SDSS clus-
ters identiﬁed by the RedMapper team [31–33]. This large
RedMapper has made redshift complete in our earlier work
[9, 10] by cross correlation with the BOSS spectroscopic data,
which includes over 7000 clusters for which precise correlation
arXiv:1711.05210v3  [astro-ph.CO]  17 Oct 2019

2
functions have been estimated [9, 10]. The correlation function
scales as the square of the bias and, as we show here, is already
sensitive enough to detect the eﬀects of neutrino mass inferred
from the oscillation experiments of P mν ≃0.056eV.
We rely on the latest Planck determinations of all the cos-
mological parameters [46] required here for the theoretical
calculation of the bias enhancement by neutrinos and for
the comparison with the MXXL cosmological simulations,
where for a ﬂat cosmology, ΩΛ = 0.6911, Ωm = 0.3089,
Ωb = 0.0497, h = 0.6773 and the amplitude of the primor-
dial power-spectrum As = 2.142 × 10−9, and hence the only
ﬂexible quantity is the cold dark matter density, deﬁned as,
Ωc = Ωm −Ωb −Ων, with Ωνh2 ≡(1.015)3/4mν
94.07 ev . We havIn this
analysis we examine ﬁrst one species of dominantly massive
neutrino, corresponding to the standard neutrino hierarchy, and
then we discuss implications for the inverted hierarchy, which
may be favored by our results. We emphasis here that we are
safe from the simulation to simulation scatter discussed by Tin-
ker [37] owing to the relatively narrow halo mass and redshift
range that we consider.
NEUTRINO BIAS ENHANCEMENT FOR CLUSTERS
We ﬁrst present a consistent formalism for the biasing eﬀect
of light neutrinos on cluster scales, emphasizing that the cluster
correlation provides a relatively sensitive way of detecting
the eﬀect of standard relic neutrinos. We then compare the
cluster correlation function predicted by our analysis with that
measured for the galaxy clusters from the SDSS selected in the
manner described above.
Theoretical Considerations
Here we estimate the eﬀect of light neutrinos on the
correlation function of clusters using the empirically peak
background split approximation [5], hereafter Sheth-Tormen
(ST).
In the ST approach, the bias is deﬁned as,
bS T ≡aν1 −1
δc
+
2p/δc
1 + (aν1)p ,
(1)
here ν1 ≡(δc/σ0)2 where δc refers to the critical over-
density.
In addition, σ2
0
≡
 1
2π2
 R
dkk2P(k)W2(kR) de-
notes the 0-th spectral moment of the matter power-
spectrum and we use the top hat ﬁlter function, W(kR) =
3 (sin (kR) −kR cos (kR)) /(kR)3, as a smoothing factor. We
use the usual simulation calibrated free parameter preferences,
a = 0.707, p = 0.3. We compute the 0-th spectral moment of
the matter power-spectrum as well as the critical over-density.
The former can be calculated using the matter power spectrum,
conveniently given by the CAMB code [38, 55].
To estimate the critical over-density for cluster formation, we
determine the linearly evolved value of the initial over-destiny
required to have a collapse at red-shift z. Adopting spherical
collapse, which is a good estimate for heavy halos, we then
calculate the evolution of the CDM + Baryon over-density,
δcb ≡(¯ρcδc + ¯ρbδb) / (¯ρc + ¯ρb) as,
¨δcb + 2H˙δcb −4
3
˙δ2
cb
1 + δcb
−3H2
0
2
(Ωcbδcb + Ωνδν) (1 + δcb) = 0,
¨R + GM
R2 + H2
0
Ωra−4 +
ρνpν
3H2
0M2
P
−ΩΛ
R + GδMν(< R)
R2
= 0,
(2)
where ρν = 2
R
d3p
(2π)3
√
p2+m2ν
exp (p/Tν)+1 refers to the neutrino en-
ergy density and pν = 2
R
d3p
(2π)3
p2
√
p2+m2ν
1
exp (p/Tν)+1 denotes
the neutrino pressure. Here Tν =
 1.95491
a

K is the phys-
ical temperature. In addition, Ωcb ≡(Ωc + Ωb) a−3, δν ≡
δMν(<
R)/

4πR3H2
0M2
PΩν

in which
δMν(<
R)
=
mν
R
Vc d3r
R
d3q
(2π)3 f1(q, r, t) refers to the neutrino mass function
interior to the radius R. f1 is the linear perturbation to the
neutrino distribution function, f = f0 + f1, which can be calcu-
lated from the evolution of the radius R, in the absence of the
neutrino clustering, [40], as,
f1(r, q, η) = 2mν
Tν
Z t
t0
dt′
a(t′)
exp (q/Tν)
den  1 + exp (q/Tν)2
GδM(t′)
r2
×
 
α q
Tν
−ˆq · ˆr
! a3(t′)r3
R3
Θ

r2 
1 + q2/T 2
ν α2 −2q/Tνα

<
R2(t′)
a2(t′)

+
Θ

r2 
1 + q2/T 2
ν α2 −2q/Tναˆq · ˆr

≥R2(t′)
a2(t′)

 1 + q2/T 2ν α2 −2q/Tναˆq · ˆr3/2

.
(3)
where δM(t) = M −4π
3 ¯ρcbR3 and Θ denotes the Heaviside step
function. In addition, α is deﬁned as α ≡Tν (η −η′) /(mνr)
and η is deﬁned as, a2dη = dt, note that both r and q are comov-
ing quantities. These are the set of the diﬀerential equations
that must be solved together with the evolution of the Hubble
parameter: H2 = H2
0

Ωγa−4 + (Ωc + Ωb)a−3 + ΩΛ +
ρν
(3M2
PH2
0)

We now describe the initial conditions, for which there are
three independent, relevant quantities, δcb,ini, ˙δcb,ini, aini. The
ﬁrst determines the collapse redshift that relates to second con-
dition via: ˙δcb,ini = δcb,ini
 d ln δcb(t)
dt

|,ini, where the term in the
parenthesis is free of any normalization and can be extracted
from the CAMB code. Initiating the evolution at z ≃200,
we also read oﬀthe value of the initial scale factor. Using
the above quantities, we can obtain Rini = ¯Rini

1 −1
3δcb,ini

and ˙Rini = Hini ¯Rini

1 −1
3δcb,ini −1
3H−1
ini ˙δcb,ini

, where ¯Rini =

3M
4πρcb,ini
1/3 depends on the value of the halo mass.
Next, we compute the evolution of system. The only un-
known quantity is the redshift of collapse. We treat this as
a perturbation to an Einstein-de (Ed) Sitter universe with a
constant critical over-density [41, 42], δc,Ed = 1.68647, by
truncating the evolution at a redshift once the non-linear over-
density for any cosmology reaches this number. We then read

3
oﬀthe linearly evolved over-density at this reference redshift
as the critical over-density. We checked the robustness of our
critical over-density by choosing another method in which we
write the spherical collapse equations in terms of 1/δ instead of
δ, thus removing the need to specify the actual collapse. Com-
paring the results of these two methods, we found a diﬀerence
of only 0.01% thus ensuring that the results are independent of
the method we use. We now have the information necessary to
compute the bias for ST.
5
10
20
30
r
£
h −1 Mpc
¤
101
102
Ξ(r )
λ1 ∈[22, 30)
λ2 ∈[30, 45)
λ3 ∈[45, 200)
MXXL clustering
MXXL abundances
FIG. 1: Measured correlation functions of ReDMaPPer clusters for 3
richness ranges, showing clearly the observed amplitude scales with
mass at almost the same rate as the predicted by the MXXL simulation
(dotted and dashed curves) conﬁrming directly the fundamental Gaus-
sian ﬁeld hypothesis for the formation of structure. In detail, when
averaged, the data lies signiﬁcantly higher than the pure CDM based
prediction based on a ﬁt to the cluster mass function from MXXL, by
≃6% (dashed curves).
N-body Simulation
Here we check our analytical predictions against our new
cosmological simulations in the presence of massive neutrinos,
following the grid-based method described in [11, 12]. We
combine the GADGET2 N-body code [13] for CDM particles
and simulate relic neutrinos as a grid-based density ﬁeld, where
only the long-range force (the PM part) is re-calculated by
incorporating the eﬀects of neutrinos: δtot = (1−fν)δc+b + fνδν,
where fν is the mass fraction of cosmological neutrinos, and
δtot, δc+b and δν are the over-density ﬁelds of, respectively, total
matter, CDM and baryons, and neutrinos. δν follows the linear
perturbation theory with the potential provided by all matter,
whereas δc+b is calculated in GADGET2 and then replaced
by δtot after we take this weighted average. We iterate to
advance δν and δtot using the linear perturbation equation and
GADGET2. We have set up four realizations for each neutrino
mass, each realization having a box size of 800 Mpc/h and
5123 simulation particles. The halo catalogues are generated
by Amiga Halo Finder [14].
Comparison with Observations
The carefully constructed and well tested sample of SDSS
clusters as deﬁned by the RedMapper team [31–33] has pro-
vided many insights, including accurate lensing and SZ based
mass-richness relations [10, 17, 43]. Redmapper clusters are
determined to be complete to z = 0.33 in terms of detectability
within the SDSS above a minimum richness of λ > 20 over
this redshift range [31–33]. This claim is strongly supported
by [9], where the observed numbers of RedMapper clusters are
proportional to the cosmological volume in the redshift range
z < 0.33, but above which their numbers markedly decline
relative to the available volume. Importantly, this volume com-
plete sample of Redmapper clusters has been made redshift
complete by [9] for the ﬁrst time, at a level of 97% within the
above RedMapper limit z < 0.33, by cross correlation with the
latest SDSS/BOSS spectroscopic redshift surveys, allowing
correlation functions to be accurately measured on small scales
using these accurate redshifts [9].
The 2-point cluster correlation function of this complete
sample is shown in Figure 1, where it is clear that the ampli-
tude of this correlation function increases with cluster richness.
The correlation function has been integrated on small scales
along the line of sight to account for the well known velocity
eﬀects that otherwise aﬀect pairwise distance separations. We
compare this data with the predicted correlation functions from
the large, MXXL simulation of pure CDM [44]. This simu-
lation is scaled by the latest Planck cosmological parameters,
following the prescription of [44], for the same redshift range
as the complete RedMapper sample, and integrated along the
line of sight in the same way as the data. Two diﬀerent sets of
simulation based predictions are calculated, where the lower
curves shown in Figure 1 are determined by a joint ﬁt to the
abundance of RedMapper clusters as a function of richness
whereas the upper curves are ﬁtted to the clustering. For both
of the above simulations a standard power-law function for
the mass-richness relation is used for this transformation with
three free parameters, slope, scatter and the pivot point normal-
ization (see [9] for details), that are solved for simultaneously
in comparing the measurements with the MXXL simulation.
It is clear from the comparison in Figure 1 that the ob-
served cluster correlations are close to the MXXL predictions
in slope and amplitude and the scaling with richness shown
in Figure 1 for the 3 independent richness bins, implying ex-
cellent agreement with the GRF hypothesis for the origin of
cosmic structure. In detail we see the abundance-based pre-
diction (solid curves) is systematically below the data and
below the cluster-based ﬁt (dashed curves). This mismatch
was highlighted by [9] without any satisfactory resolution,
with the diﬀerence between these two mass-richness relations
found to be mainly in the normalization, with the correlation-
function based predicted cluster being ≃56% higher in mass,

4
M200m = 4.7 × 1014M⊙/h, than the abundance-based mean
cluster mass (3.02 ± 0.11) × 1014M⊙/h. This is a large diﬀer-
ence in mass and reﬂects the relatively shallow dependence of
clustering amplitude with cluster mass, so that a signiﬁcantly
higher mean mass is required to match the observed clustering
level but corresponds to a much lower cluster abundance as
the cluster mass function is inherently steep. Furthermore,
the larger mean mass of the correlation function ﬁt (shown in
Figure 1) is excluded by the independent weak-lensing based
mass-richness relation derived by [43] for the same RedMapper
sample, where the mean mass is just (2.70 ± 0.2) × 1014M⊙/h
with a 7% estimated uncertainty [43], and therefore consistent
within 1.3σ with our aforementioned abundance-based zero-
point mass. This WL based mass is also supported by a new
mass-richness related analysis performed in [45] who derive
a mean mass of 3.0 × 1014M⊙/h using WL measurements for
RedMapper clusters. This agreement of independent weak
lensing based masses with our abundance-based best ﬁtting
mean mass further motivates our exploration of the eﬀect of
light neutrinos: since, as we derived in the previous section,
an enhancement in bias is expected to be signiﬁcant in terms
of reconciling our observed mass function with the observed
correlation function without the need for increasing cluster
masses.
We now show how our excess correlation may be explained
by the neutrino induced bias derived above. The relation be-
tween the 2-point mass correlation function of collapsed halos
relates simply to the bias of a GRF via: ξHH(r) ≡b2ξMM(r),
where ξHH denotes the correlation of the collapsed halos, and b
is the bias. This relation may be linked to the mass power spec-
trum via ξMM(r) ≡
 1
2π2
 R
dkk2P(k)W(kr), where W(kr) refers
to the top hat ﬁlter function. Observationally, we estimate
the above correlation function with the following power-law
scaling: ξ(r)obs = (r/r0)−γ, of correlation length ro and slope
of γ = 1.7 ± 0.05.
To compare the RedMapper observations with theory, we are
required to use the mass-richness relation. This link is obtained
simultaneously in the ﬁts, as described in Ref. [9] - where we
ﬁt the halo mass function from the simulations leaving free
the 3 parameters of the MR relation, namely the zero point,
the slope and the dispersion, as shown in ﬁgure 14 of [9]. The
values of these 3 parameters are in very good agreement with
those independently derived using lensing, X-ray, and SZ based
MR relations in Refs. [10, 43]. These independent derivations
were made subsequent to our work, providing veriﬁcation that
adds great conﬁdence to our best-ﬁtting neutrino mass.
We can make a rough consistency check of this result that is
independent of the simulation based comparison used above by
looking at the absolute value of r0 from a weak-lensing based
mass-richness relation for this same cluster sample derived in
[43]. In order to calculate this quantity, we use the fact that at
r = r0 the halo-halo correlation function is, by deﬁnition, unity,
and seek b2
S T
 1
2π2
R
dkk2P(k)W(kr)

= 1 for which we use the
ST bias as the input. The results are given in Fig. 2. In the left
panel, we present the relation between the ﬁtted correlation
length r0 and the halo mass in these sets of simulation, averaged
over four realisations. To be consistent with the RedMapper
data, the shown results are also averaged over the redshift
range of 0.1 to 0.3. In the right panel, we show the analytical
results the r0. Both the analytical and simulation predictions
are in close accord. The impact of the massive neutrinos on
enhancing the halo clustering is clearly seen from these plots.
The mean observational value (marked in red point) is slightly
higher than the pure CDM predictions corresponding to the
range 0.08eV < P mν < 0.13eV.
Discussion and Conclusions
We have shown here that even the minimum mass density
of standard relic neutrinos is expected to enhance the cluster-
ing length of galaxy clusters by at least 3%, relative to pure
cold dark matter. This bias induced boost to the clustering of
clusters is more than an order of magnitude larger than the
eﬀect of neutrinos on the general power spectrum of galaxies
because the clustering bias of clusters is approximately three
times that for galaxies and the correlation function amplitude
scales as the square of this bias. Furthermore, the sign of this
boost in the clustering of halos has the opposite sign to the
usually sought suppression of the matter power spectrum of the
mass density ﬁeld, which is predicted to “step” down on scales
below the predicted free streaming scale of ≲100Mpc. This
enhancement of the halo correlation function is noted in the
simulations of [59] and also visible in Figure 3 of [60] when
incorporating light neutrinos.
The carefully deﬁned RedMaPPer clusters from the SDSS
with full spectroscopic redshifts by [10] provides a large, com-
plete sample of clusters with accurate redshifts. Using this
data we have claimed a 6% bias enhancement of the correla-
tion length of clusters, corresponding to total neutrino mass of
P mν = 0.119 ± 0.034eV at 67% conﬁdence level, for the stan-
dard relic mass density and standard Cosmological parameters.
This lies well below the robust bound of < 0.24eV from the
Planck collaboration (2015), and below subsequent claimed
improvements on this upper limit that incorporate additional
constraining data from cluster counts [22] and the Lyman-α
forest [23].
Finally, in order to make our predictions more robust, we
have explored the relatively sensitive dependence of neutrino
mass on Ωm by modifying CosmoMC [54, 55] to include our
measured correlation length data points with their errors shown
in Figure 2. The data we used are the ratios between r0 in a
universe with and without neutrinos. In the case without neutri-
nos, r0 is calculated assuming independent values of As (where
As refers to the amplitude of the primordial power-spectrum)
and Ωch2 than the case with massive neutrinos. This naturally
increases the error bars compared with the case with similar
values of As and Ωch2 for the numerator and denominator of r0
ratio. The likelihood is assumed to be Gaussian. We also use
the Planck CMB measurements including low-ℓand high-ℓ
temperature and polarization data. For convenience, the mass

5
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
14.6
Log(Mh/M h
1)
14
16
18
20
22
24
r0(Mpc/h)
(Simulation-Observation)
experimental data
fit,lcdm
fit, m = 0.05eV
fit, m = 0.1eV
fit, m = 0.15eV
mean data
sim,lcdm
sim, m = 0.05eV
sim, m = 0.1eV
sim, m = 0.15eV
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
14.6
Log(Mh/M h
1)
14
16
18
20
22
24
r0(Mpc/h)
(Linear theory-Observation)
experimental data
lcdm
m = 0.05eV
m = 0.1eV
m = 0.15eV
mean data
FIG. 2: (Left) comparison between the correlation length r0 from the simulation and from 3 independent richness bins (green points) and the
data mean (purple point) as a function of halo mass. The simulation points are shown with diﬀerent colors. (Right) comparison between the
linear theory and the RedMapper results. The predicted neutrino mass from the linear theory is similar to that from the non-linear simulation,
with a somewhat weaker mass dependence.
of the neutrinos is assumed to be entirely one species. Flat
priors are used for Σmν, Ωch2, and ln(1010As). The other cos-
mological parameters are ﬁxed: Ωbh2 = 0.02280, τ = 0.066,
ns = 0.9667, H0 = 67.73 km s−1 Mpc−1. The Gelman and
Rubin statistics for convergence R −1 is 0.01138. Figure 3
presents the results of this analysis. Here we present 1σ and
2σ level contours of the neutrino mass wrt Ωm. The inferred
neutrino mass is Σmν = 0.119 ± 0.034 eV at 67% conﬁdence
level.
At face value, our result is in best agreement with the in-
verted based hierarchy minimum mass of ≃0.1eV based on
neutrino oscillation work, and in some tension with the mini-
mum value for the normal hierarchy of ∼0.056eV at the 95%
conﬁdence level. If ongoing laboratory results from the NOvA
and T2K collaborations continue to favor a normal neutrino
mass hierarchy [53, 56], however, then our result may imply
a somewhat higher neutrino mass than minimum oscillation
based value of mν ≃0.056eV. Alternatively, the standard relic
density underestimates the total cosmological neutrino den-
sity by a factor of two, implying an additional light neutrino
contribution. This possibility, however, is not supported by
measurements of the CMB anisotropy that strictly imply only
three relic neutrino species [62] as in the Standard Model of
particle physics.
We aim to improve upon our result by jointly ﬁtting the
cluster correlation function enhancement and the cluster abun-
dance suppression. We will also use the simulations to make an
assessment of the preferred mass range for constraining relic
neutrinos, as the halo mass function is so steep (proportional
to M−4) in the cluster regime that selecting groups > 1013M⊙
may prove more fruitful than expanding the survey volume.
An elegant group deﬁnition for the SDSS has been devised
by Zhao et al [57] for which the mean bias is b ≃2, simi-
lar to the luminous red galaxy (LRG) mass scale, so that we
may use these large samples with redshift measurements for a
signiﬁcant improvement.
We can also improve upon our precision for P mν by deﬁn-
ing a more accurate weak lensing based mass-richness relation
for a representative subset of our complete cluster sample.
Such work will be possible with the upcoming wide ﬁeld J-
PAS survey [61], which can go beyond the careful SDSS based
work of Simet et al (2017) to greater depth and higher angular
resolution over the Northern sky.
We can see that pursuing the above practical improvements
is really well motivated given how close we are already to
achieving the accuracy required to deﬁnitively distinguish be-
tween the inverted and normal hierarchies and the fully mass
degenerate minimum of P mν ≃0.15eV. Furthermore, with
future data reaching higher redshift we may also examine the
redshift dependence of the combined correlation amplitude and
cluster abundance evolution to test whether the lightest relic
neutrino eigenstate remains relativistic until today.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful for useful conversations with Neta Bahcall,
Andrew Cohen, Daniel J. Eisenstein, Lars Hernquist, Lam

6
0.306 0.308 0.310 0.312 0.314
m
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
m (eV)
3.05
3.06
3.07
3.08
3.09
ln(1010As)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
m (eV)
FIG. 3: Left: the 1 ans 2σ level contours of Σmν versus Ωm, marginalising over the other relevant cosmological parameters, from our joint
MCMC analysis. Right: same as left, but with Σmν versus ln(1010As) instead. The inferred neutrino mass is mν = 0.119 ± 0.034 eV at 67%
conﬁdence level.
Hui, Francisco-Shu Kitaura, Marilena Loverde, Airam Marcos-
Caballero, Abraham Loeb, Enrique Martinez, Alberto Rubino,
Martin Schmaltz, David Spergel, Henry Tye, Jun Qing Xia
and Francisco Villaescusa. We also thank two anonymous
referees for their insightful comments. The work of R.E. was
previously supported by Hong Kong University through the
CRF Grants of the Government of the Hong Kong SAR under
HKUST4/CRF/13 and is currently supported by the Institute
for Theory and Computation at the Center for Astrophysics at
Harvard University. GFS acknowledges the IAS at HKUST
and the Laboratoire APC-PCCP, Universit´e Paris Diderot and
Sorbonne Paris Cit´e (DXCACHEXGS) and also the ﬁnan-
cial support of the UnivEarthS Labex program at Sorbonne
Paris Cit´e (ANR-10-LABX-0023 and ANR-11-IDEX-0005-
02). TJB thanks IAS fr generous hospitality.
