Draft version March 6, 2023
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63
Gravothermal solutions of SIDM halos: mapping from constant to velocity-dependent cross section
Shengqi Yang,1 Xiaolong Du,1 Zhichao Carton Zeng,2, 3 Andrew Benson,1 Fangzhou Jiang,1
Ethan O. Nadler,4, 5 and Annika H. G. Peter2, 6, 3
1Carnegie Observatories, 813 Santa Barbara Street, Pasadena, CA 91101, U.S.A
2Department of Physics, The Ohio State University, 191 W. WoodruﬀAve., Columbus, OH 43210, USA
3Center for Cosmology and AstroParticle Physics, The Ohio State University, 191 W. WoodruﬀAve., Columbus, OH 43210, USA
4Carnegie Observatories, 813 Santa Barbara Street, Pasadena, CA 91101, USA
5Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90007, USA
6Department of Astronomy, The Ohio State University, 140 W. 18th Ave., Columbus, OH 43210, USA
ABSTRACT
The scale-free gravothermal ﬂuid formalism has long proved eﬀective in describing the evolution
of self-interacting dark matter halos with a constant dark matter particle cross section.
However,
whether the gravothermal ﬂuid solutions match numerical simulations for velocity-dependent cross-
section scenarios remains untested. In this work, we provide a fast mapping method that relates the
constant-cross-section gravothermal solution to models with arbitrary velocity dependence in the cross
section. We show that the gravothermal solutions after mapping are in good agreement with Arepo
N-Body simulation results. We illustrate the power of this approach by applying this fast mapping
method to a halo hosting a low surface brightness galaxy UGC 128. We show that this fast mapping
method can be used to constrain free parameters in a physically motivated cross-section model and
illustrate parameter space favored by the rotation curve measurement.
Keywords: Dark matter; Milky Way dark matter halo
1. INTRODUCTION
Self-interacting dark matter (SIDM) is a promising
class of candidate to explain the cored dark matter (DM)
halos implied by observations of local dwarf galaxies (de
Blok et al. 2008; Oh et al. 2015), while maintaining
the accurate reproduction of large-scale cosmic proper-
ties provided by the cold dark matter (CDM) paradigm
(Peebles 1982; Planck Collaboration et al. 2011, 2014;
Anderson et al. 2012). In the SIDM model, ﬁrst pro-
posed by Spergel & Steinhardt (2000), in addition to
the gravitational interactions, DM particles also scatter
with each other. The eﬀect of scattering is negligible
on large scales due to the low DM particle number den-
sity and the resulting long relaxation time. However,
the DM particle collisional mean free path can become
smaller than the orbital Jeans scale near the halo center,
causing the formation of an isothermal core and even the
gravitational catastrophe (Lynden-Bell & Wood 1968)
at small scales.
Corresponding author: Shengqi Yang
syang@carnegiescience.edu
The gravothermal ﬂuid formalism originally developed
for studying the gravitational catastrophe of stellar clus-
ters (Lynden-Bell & Wood 1968; Eggleton 1971) has
been extended to isolated SIDM halos and provides rich
physical insights into the nature of SIDM halo evolu-
tion (e.g.
Lynden-Bell & Eggleton 1980; Balberg &
Shapiro 2002; Balberg et al. 2002; Shapiro 2018; Essig
et al. 2019; Nishikawa et al. 2020). Although it makes
multiple simplifying assumptions, numerical solutions to
the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism show surprisingly good
agreement with idealized N-Body simulations and also
match reasonably well with cosmological SIDM zoom-in
simulations (Koda & Shapiro 2011; Elbert et al. 2015;
Essig et al. 2019; Outmezguine et al. 2022).
A nice
property of the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism is that
the ﬂuid equations themselves can be re-written into a
form that is independent of the halo density and radius
scales. Therefore, although computationally expensive,
the ﬂuid formalism only needs to be numerically solved
once and can be rescaled to SIDM halos with arbitrary
masses, sizes, and concentrations.
All previous comparisons between the gravothermal
solutions and numerical simulations have assumed a con-
arXiv:2205.02957v3  [astro-ph.CO]  2 Mar 2023

2
Yang et al.
stant DM particle scattering cross section.
However,
if SIDM is the explanation for the apparent deviations
from CDM behavior on small scales, then recent ob-
servations indicate that the cross section, σ, for DM
particle self-interaction is likely varying among systems
of diﬀerent scales. Speciﬁcally, σ is constrained to be
of the order of 0.1 cm2/g, 1 cm2/g, and 10 cm2/g for
galaxy cluster, galactic, and dwarf-galaxy halos, respec-
tively, where the DM particle velocity dispersion de-
creases from ∼1000 km/s to ∼1 km/s (e.g.
Kapling-
hat et al. 2016; Elbert et al. 2018; Sagunski et al. 2021;
Andrade et al. 2022). A velocity-dependent cross sec-
tion σ ∝v−4 at high velocity is also motivated by par-
ticle physics, assuming a Yukawa or Coulomb poten-
tial for the self-interaction (Ackerman et al. 2009; Feng
et al. 2009; Ibe & Yu 2010; Kummer et al. 2018). Moti-
vated by this, more recent SIDM numerical simulations
have started to focus on velocity-dependent cross sec-
tion models (e.g. Nadler et al. 2020). Testing whether
the gravothermal ﬂuid solutions are still in good agree-
ment with numerical simulations assuming a velocity-
dependent cross section model becomes crucial in devel-
oping better understanding of the SIDM N-Body sim-
ulations, as well as justifying SIDM cross section con-
straints derived by gravothermal ﬂuid formalism-based
methods.
In this work, we show using an analytic gravother-
mal ﬂuid formalism that assuming diﬀerent cross sec-
tion values/models eﬀectively re-scales SIDM halo evo-
lution rates.
In particular, there exists a one-on-one
time mapping between any two SIDM halos simulated
by the gravothermal ﬂuid approach such that their den-
sity, velocity, and all the other physical properties are
identical up to some re-scaling factors. Based on this
ﬁnding, we propose a fast mapping method that trans-
fers the gravothermal numerical solutions assuming a
constant SIDM cross section to those with arbitrary
velocity dependent cross section models.
To test the
performance of this mapping method we perform mul-
tiple idealized N-Body simulations assuming velocity-
dependent cross section scenarios with Arepo (Springel
2010). We ﬁnd excellent agreement between the mapped
gravothermal solutions and N-Body simulation results.
This mapping approach is powerful because it eliminates
the degrees of freedom introduced by SIDM cross section
model assumptions, such that one only needs to solve the
gravothermal ﬂuid equations for once and one can then
re-scale the solution to halos of arbitrary sizes, masses,
and cross section models. Due to the high computational
eﬃciency, this method is useful for exploring the con-
tinuous parameter space and constraining SIDM cross
sections.
It is also applicable to semi-analytic galaxy
formation models to eﬃciently generate SIDM halo pop-
ulations. To demonstrate the utility of this approach, we
combine the mapping method with rotation curve mea-
surements of the low surface brightness (LSB) galaxy
UGC 128 (van der Hulst et al. 1993) and illustrate the
parameters of the Navarro–Frenk–White (NFW) den-
sity proﬁle (Navarro et al. 1996) and velocity-dependent
cross section models favored by observations.
As this work was nearing completion, Outmezguine
et al. (2022; hereafter
O22) introduced a mapping
method with a similar spirit, but which diﬀers in detail
from our work. We ﬁnd that O22 only compared the
mapped gravothermal solutions with idealized N-Body
simulations that assume constant cross sections (Koda
& Shapiro 2011). Example applications of their map-
ping method are also not discussed in detail. We have
therefore expanded this work to include comparison of
our approach with that of O22.
Calibrating the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism to cos-
mological zoom-in simulations is an even more inter-
esting topic to explore.
However, cosmological simu-
lations generally contains more complicated physics and
can break multiple assumptions made in the current
ﬂuid model. As a ﬁrst step, in this work we will only
compare gravothermal solutions with idealized SIDM N-
Body simulations for isolated halos with constant or
velocity dependent cross sections. We leave the more
complicated gravothermal solution versus cosmological
simulation comparisons to future works.
The plan of this paper is as follows.
In Section 2
we brieﬂy introduce our idealized SIDM halo simula-
tion sets. Section 3 is an introduction to the gravother-
mal ﬂuid formalism. We brieﬂy review the long-mean-
free-path (lmfp) gravothermal solution mapping method
among diﬀerent constant cross scenarios introduced by
Balberg et al. (2002); Koda & Shapiro (2011); Essig
et al. (2019) in Section 4. We then explain the method-
ology of mapping the lmfp gravothermal solutions from
constant cross section σ to velocity dependent cross
section σ(v) in Section 5, and comparing the mapped
gravothermal solutions with N-Body simulation results
as well as O22 in Section 6. We brieﬂy discuss the gen-
eralization of this lmfp mapping method to the short-
mean-free-path (smfp) and intermediate regime in Sec-
tion 7. In Section 8 we combine the mapping method
with observational data and show parameter constraints
of the velocity-dependent cross section models. We con-
clude in Section 9.
2. IDEALIZED SIDM N-BODY SIMULATION
In this work we perform idealized N-Body simulations
of an isolated Milky Way-sized halo with NFW initial

σ(v) mapping
3
density proﬁle:
ρ(r) =
ρs
r
rs

1 + r
rs
2 ,
(1)
where ρs = 4.2 × 106 M⊙/kpc3, and rs = 24.54 kpc.
The halo virial radius and mass, deﬁned with overden-
sity ∆vir = 99.2 with respect to the critical density, are
rvir = 280.6 kpc and Mvir = 1012.1M⊙.
To guaran-
tee a ﬁnite halo mass, we apply an exponential cutoﬀ
to the halo density proﬁle at rvir. Convergence test re-
sults show that such an exponential cutoﬀat r ≳10rs
brings negligible inﬂuence to the SIDM halo gravother-
mal evolution. The properties of this halo are chosen to
be consistent with the host halo from the CDM zoom-
in simulation presented in Nadler et al. (2020), which
has also been resimulated in velocity-dependent SIDM
models.1 However, our selection of these halo proper-
ties is an arbitrary choice for testing the performance of
the gravothermal solution mapping method introduced
in Section 5. Since the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism is
scale free (i.e. independent of ρs and rs besides some re-
scaling factors), comparisons between the gravothermal
solutions and isolated SIDM halo simulations of arbi-
trary sizes and masses are equivalent.
To
avoid
extremely
long
halo
core
collapsing
timescales and, therefore, expensive simulations, we se-
lect a large constant cross section factor σc = 30 cm2/g
and consider a simple velocity-dependent cross section
model introduced in Gilman et al. (2021),
σ(v) =
σc

1 + v2
ω2
2 ,
(2)
where ω is a characteristic velocity beyond which the
cross section drops as v−4. This asymptotic behavior
is motivated by Coulomb or Yukawa interactions (Ack-
erman et al. 2009; Feng et al. 2009; Ibe & Yu 2010;
Kummer et al. 2018). The factor 1 in the denominator
is used to avoid divergent cross section for low-velocity
particles in the numerical simulations.
We consider four diﬀerent cross section models where
ω = ∞(i.e. σ = σc = 30 cm2/g is a constant), and
ω = 1000, 500, 400 km/s. Notice that since DM parti-
cle 1D root-mean-square (rms) velocity at the halo cen-
ter and at the core-formation moment (when the halo
central density reaches minimum) is about 100 km/s,
1 This host halo was selected from the CDM cosmological simula-
tion c125–1024, and its corresponding zoom-in simulation was
ﬁrst presented in Mao et al. (2015).
corresponding to a 3D rms relative velocity of about
250 km/s, those four scenarios corresponds to constant
cross section, and weak, intermediate, strong cross sec-
tion velocity dependency, respectively.
We use SpherIC (Garrison-Kimmel et al. 2013) to
generate ﬁve initial conditions with identical resolu-
tions and halo properties, but diﬀerent random seeds.
Through this we can quantify the eﬀects of discrete-
ness noise in the initial conditions on the evolution of
the halo in the N-body simulations. We set the particle
mass to 106 M⊙so the halo in each simulation is resolved
with 1.7 × 106 particles. For each cross section scenario
we simulate ﬁve halos with the Arepo SIDM module,
and we direct the reader to Vogelsberger et al. (2012,
2014, 2019) for a detailed introduction to the numeri-
cal method. This SIDM simulation pipeline has been
adopted by many previous works (e.g. Zeng et al. 2022)
and has been proved to generate valid simulation results
for cross section up to 60 cm2/g.
3. GRAVOTHERMAL FLUID FORMALISM
Consider a spherically symmetric and isolated halo.
Assuming gravothermal equilibrium is achieved at every
radius and every moment, the halo evolution can be de-
scribed by the following four equations (see also Balberg
et al. 2002; Essig et al. 2019):
∂M
∂r = 4πr2ρ,
(3)
∂(ρv2
rms)
∂r
= −GMρ
r2
,
(4)
L
4πr2 = −κ∂T
∂r ,
(5)
ρv2
rms
γ −1
 ∂
∂t

M
ln v2
rms
ργ−1 = −
1
4πr2
∂L
∂r .
(6)
Throughout this paper we use M(r) to denote halo en-
closed mass at radius less than r. Then, ρ(r), vrms(r),
L(r), κ(r), and T(r) = mv2
rms(r)/kB correspond to halo
density, 1D rms velocity averaged over the Maxwell-
Boltzmann (MB) distribution, luminosity, thermal con-
ductivity, and temperature at radius r respectively.
Here, m is the DM particle mass and kB is the Boltz-
mann constant. Since we do not consider the halo center
movement throughout this work, the rms velocity and
velocity dispersion among DM particles are identical at
all radii. Assuming the DM particles act as a monotonic
ideal gas, we set the adiabatic index γ = 5/3. The Jeans
equation (Eq 4) forces gravothermal equilibrium where
the outward pressure ∂(ρv2
rms)/∂r is balanced by the
gravitational force. Eq 5 deﬁnes the heat ﬂux, and Eq 6

4
Yang et al.
is the ﬁrst law of thermal dynamics. Together Eqs 5–6
govern the quasi-static time evolution of a SIDM halo.
For ideal gas environments where the heat conduction
is solely realized by the thermal motion and collisions
among gas particles, the kinetic theory of gases gives
heat conductivity:
κsmfp ∝nλ2kB
tr
,
(7)
and it is conventional to deﬁne κsmfp = 2.1vrmskB/σ, de-
rived from integration over the MB velocity distribution.
Here, n = ρ/m is the local DM particle number density,
λ = 1/(nσ) is the mean free path, and tr = λ/v12 is the
relaxation time. Here we use σ to denote DM particle
scattering cross section, which is either a constant or a
velocity dependent quantity. We use v12 to distinguish
particle relative velocity from the 1D-rms velocity vrms
used for the temperature deﬁnition.
Eq 7 does not apply to low-density and low self-
interaction-cross-section gravothermal systems, where
most of the particles tend to orbit several times before
colliding with one another. Using the Jeans’ length H =
p
v2rms/(4πGρ) to approximate particles’ characteristic
orbital radii, Eq 7 is only accurate when λ ≪H (also re-
ferred as the short-mean-free-path or smfp regime). In
this work we only care about halo evolution processes
that satisfy λ ≫H, also referred as the long-mean-free-
path or lmfp regime. To derive the lmfp regime heat con-
ductivity one just needs to replace the mean free path
λ with the scale height H (Spitzer 1987):
κlmfp ∝nH2kB
tr
.
(8)
It is conventional to assume κlmfp = (3β/2)nH2kB/tr =
0.27βnv3
rmsσkB/(Gm), where β is an adjustable param-
eter to match the ﬂuid numerical solutions with N-body
simulations.
The value of β cannot be derived from
ﬁrst-principles and is therefore treated as a free param-
eter to be calibrated against N-body simulations. It is
known that calibration to N-Body simulations results in
β of order unity, but with some variation in the range
0.5−1.5 depending on the speciﬁc simulation and cross-
section parameters (Essig et al. 2019). We will show in
Section 6 that in the lmfp regime, it is valid to absorb
constant factors resulting from integration over the MB
velocity distributions into β when σ is constant. How-
ever, we will demonstrate that a more careful treatment
is required for relative velocity dependent cross section
σ(v12) cases.
A nice feature of this gravothermal ﬂuid formalism is
that, given the halo initial density proﬁle as NFW with
characteristic radius rs and density ρs, the equation set
Eq 3-6 can be rewritten into the scale-free form such that
the unit-less gravothermal solutions can be applied to
an arbitrary halo by re-scaling. Speciﬁcally, all physical
quantities in the ﬂuid formalism equation set x can be
separated into a unit factor x0 and a scale-free factor ˆx
(i.e. x = x0ˆx) such that Eq 3–6 can be written into the
unit-less form:
∂ˆ
M
∂ˆr = ˆρˆr2 ,
∂(ˆρˆv2
rms)
∂ˆr
= −
ˆ
M ˆρ
ˆr2 ,
ˆL
ˆr2 = −ˆκ∂ˆv2
rms
∂ˆr
,
ˆρˆv2
rms
 ∂
∂ˆt

ˆ
M
ln ˆv3
rms
ˆρ
= −1
ˆr2
∂ˆL
∂ˆr .
(9)
The unit variables are (Essig et al. 2019):
r0 = rs , ρ0 = ρs , M0 = 4πr3
sρs ,
vrms,0 =
p
4πGρsrs , t0 = 1/
p
4πGρs ,
L0 = (4π)5/2G3/2ρ5/2
s
r5
s , (σ/m)0 = 1/(ρsrs) ,
(10)
and
it
can
be
derived
that
ˆκlmfp
=
0.27 ×
4πβˆρˆv3
rms( ˆ
σ/m), ˆκsmfp = 2.1ˆvrms/( ˆ
σ/m). Hereafter we
will abbreviate ( ˆ
σ/m) as ˆσ for simplicity. We assume
ˆκ = 1/(ˆκ−1
lmfp + ˆκ−1
smfp) to join the lmfp and smfp regimes
smoothly.
The steps to solve Eq 9 numerically are (Essig et al.
2019):
1. Determine input parameters β and ˆσ.
2. Grid the halo with NFW density proﬁle ˆρ =
1/ˆr/(1 + ˆr)2 into 150 log radial bins spread uni-
formly in range −2 ≤log ˆr ≤323.
We assume
boundary conditions ˆ
M = ˆL = 0 at the inner ra-
dius and ˆL = 0 at the outer radius to solve for
the radial proﬁle of ˆvrms through the Jeans equa-
tion.
Following Pollack et al. (2015) and Essig
et al. (2019), we take values of ˆ
Mi and ˆLi of the
ith shell at the log radial grid ˆri, while ˆρi, ˆvrms,i
are taken as the averaged values between the i −1
and the ith shell.
3. Let the ﬂuid code take a small time step dˆt such
that the speciﬁc energy ˆu = 3ˆv2
rms/2 changes by a
2 In this work log denotes a base-10 logarithm and ln denotes a
natural logarithm.
3 We have tested that setting the halo outer bound at log ˆr = 1, 2, 3
or the inner bound at log ˆr = −3, −2 has negligible inﬂuence on
the ﬂuid solutions.

σ(v) mapping
5
factor of no more than 10−3 among all the shells:
dˆui
dˆt = −∂ˆLi
∂ˆ
Mi
.
(11)
4. After taking one time step forward, perturb ˆr,
ˆρ, and ˆvrms of each shell for 10 times such that
the gravothermal equilibrium (Eq 4) is established
again throughout the halo.
During the pertur-
bation, the mass, speciﬁc energy, and entropy
s = ln(ˆv3
rms/ˆρ) of each shell are conserved.
5. Repeat step 2. , 3. and 4. iteratively until core col-
lapse.
We checked that the basic assumptions made in solv-
ing Eq 9, i.e. (1) The halo is spherically symmetric, (2)
The halo mass and scale do not vary with time, are sat-
isﬁed in the idealized N-Body simulations for isolated
halos. However, those assumptions may be not valid for
cosmological simulations due to halo interactions, merg-
ers and the mass accretion.
Notice that most of the current gravothermal ﬂuid
studies are interested in SIDM models with moderate
cross section and near unity β values. Such a setup re-
sults in the halo remaining in the lmfp regime for most of
its life until core collapse occurs. Moreover, σ decreases
drastically with vrms at vrms ≳ω under the velocity-
dependent cross section scenario, leaving the heat con-
duction more likely to be dominated by the lmfp term.
We therefore focus on the gravothermal solutions in the
lmfp regime in this work.
Speciﬁcally, we choose in-
put parameters ˆσ = 0.01, β = 0.6 in step 1. and solve
Eq 9 numerically to derive the gravothermal solutions,
which will be used by the mapping method introduced
in Section 4-6. We stop the ﬂuid code evolution when
βˆσˆt reaches 173. At the last time step, the halo is still
in the lmfp regime, and has entered the core-collapsing
stage where its central density increases rapidly. The
time evolution of the ratio between ˆκlmfp and ˆκsmfp at
the halo center is shown in Figure 1 by the blue solid
curve.
We notice that the halos simulated in Section 2 adopt
a much greater cross section of ˆσ = 0.65.
To check
the validity of the lmfp assumption we numerically solve
Eq 9 for another set of input parameters {β = 0.82, ˆσ =
0.65}, and present the halo central density time evo-
lution in the red dashed curve of Figure 1. This halo
still evolves in the lmfp regime during most of its life-
time before core collapse, although the increase of cross
section boosts the halo to be closer to the smfp regime
since ˆκlmfp/ˆκsmfp ∝βˆσ2. Ideally we would like to sim-
ulate a halo with smaller cross section to better match
the assumption made in this work. However, this will
10
1
100
101
102
t
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
103
lmfp/
smfp
= 0.60 ,
= 0.01
= 0.82 ,
= 0.65
Figure 1.
Time evolution of the ratio between the lmfp
and the smfp heat conductivities at the halo center, assum-
ing two diﬀerent sets of parameters {ˆσ = 0.01, β = 0.6}
(blue solid) and {ˆσ = 0.65, β = 0.82} (red dashed).
For
the {ˆσ = 0.01, β = 0.6} set of gravothermal solution ˆκlmfp ≪
ˆκsmfp throughout the halo evolution process, so the total heat
conductivity is always dominated by the lmfp term. In the
{ˆσ = 0.65, β = 0.82} case the halo also evolves mostly in the
lmfp regime, but enters the smfp regime at βˆσˆt = 155.
delay the onset of core collapse and lead to more expen-
sive and unstable idealized N-Body simulations. We will
show later that even for this large constant cross section
ˆσ = 0.65 the lmfp assumption still holds, and the simu-
lated halo evolution matches the lmfp gravothermal so-
lution well. The smfp tension will be further alleviated
when we consider the velocity-dependent cross-section
scenarios, where the velocity dependency will largely
decrease the eﬀective cross section and bring the halo
further away from the smfp regime.
SIDM halo gravothermal evolution described by Eq 9
is shown in Figure 2.
Speciﬁcally, at the NFW ini-
tial state (shown in the red solid curves) where ˆρ =
1/ˆr/(1+ ˆr)2, the halo temperature is highest at ˆr ≈0.8.
The heat therefore ﬂows to both the halo center and out-
skirts. The halo center keeps absorbing heat until local
thermal equilibrium is reached. At this point a cored
region is formed where the density and the rms velocity
are uniform, as shown by the green dashed curves. DM
particles in the halo cored region continuously lose en-
ergy due to outward heat transfer. In this process their
orbital scale decreases and the kinetic temperature in-
creases. As shown by the blue dashed-dotted curves, the
halo core density and temperature will keep increasing
and will move further away from thermal equilibrium
with the halo outskirts. Such a regime is also referred
to as gravothermal catastrophe or core collapse.
While the gravothermal model is computationally
much more eﬃcient than running an N-body simulation
it is still too slow to apply to large ensembles of halos as

6
Yang et al.
might be required in a semi-analytic model of subhalo
evolution, or when generating realizations of subhalo
populations for analysis of gravitational lensing systems
(e.g. Benson (2012); Gilman et al. (2021)). For example,
the calculations shown in this section required around
24 CPU hours to compute. While this is trivially man-
ageable for a single halo, it is impractical to apply to
ensembles of millions of halos. As such it is useful to be
able to map a single solution of the gravothermal model
to more general cases. We will explore this possibility
in the remainder of this paper.
Additionally, in Appendix A we provide a triple power
law empirical model calibrated to this set of fully lmfp
solutions with high precision.
The advantage of this
analytical model is that it captures the halo core size,
core collapsing time, and the radius where the cored
density proﬁle joins smoothly to the halo NFW outskirt
with simple formulas, and can be easily implemented
into semi-analytic galaxy formation models.
4. MAPPING GRAVOTHERMAL SOLUTIONS
BETWEEN CONSTANT CROSS SECTIONS
In this section we brieﬂy review the mapping method
discussed in Balberg et al. (2002); Koda & Shapiro
(2011); Essig et al. (2019) that transfers the gravother-
mal solutions under a constant cross section ˆσ1 to an-
other constant cross section ˆσ2, assuming the halo is
mostly evolving in the lmfp regime.
The third and fourth equations in Eq 9 shows that
the halo evolution rate is degenerated with radius in-
dependent factors in the heat conductivity ˆκ.
In the
lmfp regime ˆκlmfp ∝βˆσ, therefore βˆσ and the inverse
of the halo evolution time ˆt are degenerate such that
the gravothermal solution time evolution can be param-
eterized by βˆσˆt.
In other words, there exists a one-
to-one mapping βaˆσaˆta ↔βbˆσbˆtb between two sets of
gravothermal solutions with parameters {βa, ˆσa} and
{βb, ˆσb} such that:
ˆxa(ˆr, ˆta) = ˆxb

ˆr, ˆta × βaˆσa
βbˆσb

,
(12)
here ˆx(ˆr, ˆt) stands for arbitrary scale-free halo property
at radius ˆr and time ˆt, including ˆρ, ˆvrms, ˆ
M, ˆL, etc. We
show the scale-free halo central density ˆρc versus βˆσˆt for
two sets of gravothermal solutions with very diﬀerent
input parameters in Figure 3.
The time evolution of
these two halos is almost identical after the ﬁrst few
time steps, where ˆκlmfp is comparable to ˆκsmfp for the
ˆσ = 0.65 case, and the lmfp assumption is not very
accurate (see Figure 1).
Although the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism considers
a very simpliﬁed picture, it provides numerical solutions
10
5
10
3
10
1
101
103
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
r
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
vrms
NFW
core formed
core collapse
Figure 2. Gravothermal evolution phases of a SIDM halo
described by the ﬂuid formalism.
The top/bottom panel
shows the halo density/rms velocity proﬁles at diﬀerent evo-
lution stages.
The red solid curves show the NFW initial
condition at ˆt = 0.
The green dashed curves present the
moment when the halo central density reaches minimum,
and an isothermal core is formed at the halo center. The
blue dashed-dotted curves show the afterward core collaps-
ing process.
10
1
100
101
102
t
100
101
102
103
c
= 0.60 ,
= 0.01
= 0.82 ,
= 0.65
Figure 3. SIDM halo central density time evolution given
by the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism at parameters {β =
0.6, ˆσ = 0.01} (blue solid) and {β = 0.82, ˆσ = 0.65} (red
dashed). The halo evolution is almost identical with time
parameter βˆσˆt when the κ is dominated by the lmfp term.

σ(v) mapping
7
0
5
10
15
20
t [Gyr]
107
108
109
c [M
/kpc3]
Arepo, 
= 30 cm2/g
Arepo, low resolution
fluid,
= 0.82
Figure 4. Halo central density evolution comparisons be-
tween the averaged Arepo N-Body simulation results (black
solid curve) and the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism numeri-
cal solutions (red solid curve). The gray band encloses the
maximum and minimum halo central density among the ﬁve
Arepo realizations. The cyan band shows convergence test
results where the particle number in each N-Body realization
is decreased from 1.7 × 106 to 4.2 × 105.
in surprisingly good agreement with idealized N-Body
simulations of isolated halos up to a slightly varying β
factor. As an example, in Figure 4 we present halo cen-
tral density versus evolution time relation comparisons
between the gravothermal solutions (red solid curve)
and the averaged Arepo N-body simulations (black solid
curve) for a Milky Way sized SIDM halo with ρs =
4.2×106M⊙/kpc3, rs = 24.54 kpc, and σ/m = 30 cm2/g
(see Section 2 for simulation details). To test conver-
gence, we reduce the particle number by a factor of 4 in
each N-Body realization and present the averaged sim-
ulation results as the cyan dashed curve. We ﬁnd the
rescaled lmfp gravothermal solution with β = 0.82 cap-
tures the overall halo evolution and reproduces the core
collapsing time in the Arepo simulation results. We no-
tice that the ﬂuid numerical solution has halo central
density that drops faster than the N-Body results prior
to isothermal core formation (0 ≤t/Gyr ≤2). The cen-
tral density also grows slightly faster than N-Body at
t ≳18 Gyr. Those diﬀerences are, again, caused by the
fact that we have selected a very large cross section for
the N-Body simulations. The basic assumption of this
mapping method, that the halo is always in the lmfp
regime, is not of high accuracy. Since our focus is to ex-
tend the lmfp gravothermal ﬂuid formalism to velocity-
dependent cross section scenario and capture the overall
halo evolution in the N-Body simulations, in this work
we will accept this slight disagreement. Moreover, the
smfp problem is alleviated when we simulate velocity
dependent cross section models.
5. MAPPING GRAVOTHERMAL SOLUTIONS
FROM CONSTANT TO
VELOCITY-DEPENDENT CROSS SECTION
In this section we introduce a mapping method to
transfer the gravothermal solutions under a constant
cross section ˆσ to those under a velocity-dependent cross
section model σ(v). In numerical simulations the veloc-
ity used to determine the scattering probability between
two particles is generally the particle relative velocity
v12, but in this section we will consider a simpler case
where the cross section is determined by the particle rms
velocity. We will discuss this mapping method under the
more practical σ(v12) scenario in Section 6.
In this paper we will use the cross section model intro-
duced by Eq 2 as an example, but this mapping method
is applicable to arbitrary σ(v) model.
In Section 4 we have shown that there exists a one-
to-one mapping βaˆσaˆta ↔βbˆσbˆtb between two sets of
gravothermal solutions with diﬀerent β and constant
cross sections.
Now consider two sets of gravother-
mal solutions, one with constant cross section {βa, ˆσa}
and the other with a velocity-dependent cross section
{βb, ˆσb(ˆvrms,b)}. The linear time mapping does not hold
anymore since ˆσb(ˆvrms,b) is a function of radius and time
rather than a constant. However, if in every small time
interval we may assume a characteristic halo-wide cross
section (or, equivalently, a characteristic velocity) such
that we can drop the cross section radial dependence
ˆσ(ˆvrms,b(ˆr, ˆtb)) ≈ˆσ(ˆvc
rms,b(ˆtb)), then there exists the fol-
lowing one-to-one mapping for every small time step:
βaˆσadˆta = βbˆσb(ˆvc
rms,b(ˆtb))dˆtb
= βbˆσb(ˆvc
rms,a(ˆta))dˆtb .
(13)
Here the second equation holds because alternating a
time dependent while radius independent SIDM cross
section has no inﬂuence on the gravothermal ﬂuid so-
lution besides non-linearly stretching the time axis. In
other words there still exists the following one-to-one
mapping between these two sets of gravothermal solu-
tions:
ˆxa(ˆr, ˆta) = ˆxb(ˆr, ˆtb)
= ˆxb
 
ˆr,
Z ˆta
0
βaˆσa
βbˆσb(ˆvcrms,a(ˆt′a))dˆt′
a
!
.
(14)
In practice one has the constant cross section gravother-
mal solution that speciﬁes the halo density and rms
velocity radial proﬁles at an array of time ˆta
=
{ˆt0
a, ˆt1
a, ..., ˆtN
a } (here ˆti
a is the time of the ith step), and
aims to map it to some velocity-dependent cross section
scenario.
To achieve this one will need to ﬁrst com-
pute the time step δˆta = {ˆt0
a, ˆt1
a −ˆt0
a, ..., ˆtN
a −ˆtN−1
a
}, and

8
Yang et al.
then use Eq 13 to compute the mapped time step δˆtb =
[βaˆσa/βbˆσb(ˆvc
rms,a(ˆta))]δˆta. Summing δˆtb up, a new time
axis ˆtb is derived such that ˆxb(ˆr, ˆtb) = ˆxa(ˆr, ˆta).
The remaining problem is to determine how to choose
the characteristic rms velocity ˆvc
rms at each time. Since
the SIDM core evolves the most with time, while the
halo outskirt shows very little time evolution (see Fig-
ure 2), we ﬁnd that simply using the halo central rms
velocity shows very good mapping performance:
ˆvc
rms(ˆt) = ˆvrms(ˆr = ˆrmin, ˆt) .
(15)
Here ˆrmin = 10−2 is the inner most radial bin of the
ﬂuid formalism.
To test this mapping method, we assume ˆσc = 0.01,
β = 0.6, and numerically solve Eq 9 for two cross section
models. For the ﬁrst test we assume a constant cross sec-
tion ˆσ = ˆσc, while for the second test we assume ˆσ =
[ˆσc/(1+ˆv2
rms/ˆω2)2]. We consider four velocity-dependent
cross section models with ˆω = 0.01, 0.1, 0.3, 1.0, corre-
sponding to very strong, strong, intermediate, and week
velocity dependency. Figure 5 presents the unitless time
of the constant cross section gravothermal solution re-
scaled by this mapping method. Notice that the dark
matter particle 1D velocity dispersion ˆvrms varies from
0.1 to 0.4 near the halo center (see Figure 2 bottom
panel), which is small comparing to 1.0. The halo SIDM
cross section for the ˆω = 1.0 case is therefore almost a
constant ˆσ = ˆσc, corresponding to a nearly trivial time
mapping relation shown by the magenta dotted curve.
Decreasing ˆω suppresses the total cross section value ˆσ,
and also boosts the velocity dependence of the parti-
cle scattering probabilities. As a result, the re-scaled ˆt
enlarges for the lower ˆω cases, and the time mapping
non-linearity becomes more signiﬁcant.
Comparisons between the mapped constant cross sec-
tion gravothermal solutions (green dashed lines) and
the actual velocity dependent gravothermal solutions
(black solid curves) are shown in Figure 6. We ﬁnd this
simple remapping method can successfully reproduce
the gravothermal solutions under velocity-dependent
cross section models in all the cases, although it over-
estimates the core collapsing time by 14%, 13%, 7.5%,
and 1.3%, respectively. This overestimation is caused
by Eq 15 where we set the halo central rms velocity as
a characteristic velocity that determines the overall DM
particle cross section at every moment. A true charac-
teristic vrms is generally lower than the central veloc-
ity, and therefore our method slightly underestimates
the eﬀective cross section at each time and will further
overestimate the core collapsing time.
We also check the performance of the mapping method
introduced in O22. Instead of using a time-varying char-
101
102
103
104
t for 
= 0.6 and 
= 0.01
100
102
104
106
108
1010
1012
rescaled t
= 0.01
= 0.10
= 0.30
= 1.00
Figure 5. Mapping relation for the gravothermal solution
time variable. The x axis present the scale-free time ˆt of the
gravothermal solution under constant cross section ˆσ = 0.01.
We map ˆt to velocity-dependent cross section model ˆσ =
[ˆσc/(1+ˆv2
rms/ˆω2)2], with ˆσc = 0.01 and ˆω = 0.01, 0.1, 0.3, 1.0.
The re-scaled time is presented on the y axis for each case.
For simplicity we have ﬁxed β = 0.6 in this test.
acteristic rms velocity ˆvc
rms, O22 makes a more simpliﬁed
assumption to use the rms velocity at the halo center and
at the instance of maximum core size as the character-
istic value. Eﬀectively the characteristic rms velocity is
assumed to be:
ˆvc
rms = ˆvrms(ˆr = ˆrmin, ˆt = ˆtˆρc,min) .
(16)
We show the halo central density time evolution mapped
by O22 as magenta dotted curves in Figure 6.
We
show that the O22 method only underestimates the core
collapsing time by 6%, 5%, 2.3%, and 0.3% for the
ˆω = 0.01, 0.1, 0.3, 1.0 scenarios, but it cannot correctly
capture the halo evolution prior to the instance of max-
imum core size.
The accuracy of our mapping method can be further
boosted if we compute the characteristic ˆvc
rms, or, equiv-
alently, the characteristic cross section, at each time step
more carefully. Speciﬁcally, at every time step we can
deﬁne the characteristic cross section as the averaged
cross section weighted by the mass of multiple shells:
ˆσc = Σiout
0
4πˆr2
i δˆriˆρiˆσb,c(ˆvrms,i)
Σiout
0
4πˆr2
i δˆriˆρi
,
(17)
where i is the shell index, and iout corresponds to the
shell that joins smoothly to the halo NFW outskirts,
beyond which the DM particle self-interaction is negli-
gible. The radius of shell iout is given by Eq A4 and
Eq A8 in Appendix A. After this step we can map the
time step of the constant cross section gravothermal so-
lution as δˆtb = [βaˆσa/βbˆσc
b(ˆta)]δˆta. We ﬁnd that this

σ(v) mapping
9
more careful way of computing the characteristic cross
section eﬀectively decreases the mapping method frac-
tional error in predicting the core collapsing moment to
6.4%, 5.6%, 2.9%, and 0.5% for ˆω = 0.01, 0.1, 0.3, 1.0
cases, providing performance equally as good as O22
while maintaining a good match to the actual gravother-
mal numerical solutions before the instance of maximum
core size. However, we do not use this more complicated
treatment as the default method because it can be com-
putationally expensive when applied to a large number
of halos. Furthermore, in practice the at most ∼10%
core collapsing time mapping error is small compared to
the β factor uncertainties.
6. CALIBRATING THE MAPPING METHOD TO
N-BODY SIMULATION
To calibrate the gravothermal solution remapping
method introduced in Section 5 to N-body simulations,
we consider cross section models that are determined by
the relative velocity v12 between two scattering particles.
Such velocity-dependent models will inﬂuence the heat
conductivity averaged over the MB velocity distribution
⟨κlmfp⟩, resulting in additional complexity.
It is worth recalling how ⟨κlmfp⟩is computed for the
constant cross section case. By convention:
κlmfp(v12) = 3
2βnH2 kB
tr
= 3βkB
8πG
nσ
m v2
rmsv12 ,
(18)
and the relative-velocity can be deﬁned as v12
=
p
v2
1 + v2
2 −2v1v2 cos θ12, where θ12 is the angle between
the velocity vectors v1 of particle 1 and v2 of particle 2.
To compute the averaged heat conductivity over the MB
velocity distribution, previous works compute the aver-
aged v12. Speciﬁcally, let us deﬁne the MB distribution
and the averaged v12 as:
fMB(v)d3v = fMB(v)v2dv sin(θ)dθdφ = v2

m
2πkBT
3/2
exp

−mv2
2kBT

sin(θ)dvdθdφ ,
⟨v12⟩=
Z π
0
sin θ1dθ1
Z 2π
0
dφ1
Z 2π
0
dφ12
Z ∞
0
v2
1fMB(v1)dv1
Z ∞
0
v2
2fMB(v2)dv2
Z π
0
v12 sin(θ12)dθ12
=
4
√π
r
kBT
m
=
4
√π vrms = 2.26vrms .
(19)
Using this result for ⟨v12⟩in Eq 18 gives the deﬁnition
assuming a constant DM particle cross section:
⟨κlmfp⟩= 3βkB
8πG
nσ
m v2
rms⟨v12⟩= 0.27βnv3
rmsσkB/(Gm).
(20)
One may argue that a better deﬁnition of the aver-
aged heat conductivity might be ⟨κlmfp⟩∝⟨v1v2v12⟩,
or ⟨v3
12⟩, or ⟨vn⟩/vn−3
rms , where n is an arbitrary num-
ber. The speciﬁc choice does not matter for constant
cross section scenarios because those diﬀerent integra-
tions will only cause a constant factor diﬀerence to
Eq 20, which can be absorbed into the free parame-
ter β.
This is no longer true if a velocity-dependent
cross section is assumed.
Speciﬁcally, the deﬁnition
⟨κlmfp⟩∝⟨vnσ(v12)⟩/(vn−3
rms σc) results in ⟨vn⟩/vn−3
rms for
ω →∞. However, with ﬁnite ω the vn term serves as a
weight in the integration. Larger n biases the integra-
tion over the MB distribution toward higher velocities,
corresponding to a smaller eﬀective cross section and
longer halo core collapse timescale. Therefore it is nec-
essary to deﬁne ⟨κlmfp⟩in a physically motivated way
that matches N-Body results.
Notice that the heat ﬂux is determined by the product
of the conductivity and the the temperature gradient:
H∂T/∂r ∼∆T ∼∆E is the characteristic temperature
variation and energy transferred within a particle’s or-
bit. Here temperature is also a statistical property aver-
aged over the MB distribution T ∝⟨v2
12⟩, so the energy
transfer rate is proportional to v3
12σ(v12) (Colquhoun
et al. 2021). We therefore deﬁne the averaged heat con-
ductivity as:
⟨κlmfp⟩= 0.27βnv3
rmskB/(Gm)⟨v1v2v3
12σ(v12)⟩
⟨v1v2v3
12⟩
.
(21)
Here the v1v2 term in the numerator comes from the
scale height H2. One v12 term is contributed by 1/tr,
and the other v2
12 term comes from the temperature
gradient.
The numerator is deﬁned such that Eq 21
reduces to Eq 20 at ω
→∞.
This deﬁnition is
slightly diﬀerent from the ansatz assumed in O22, where
⟨κlmfp⟩∝⟨v3
12σ(v12)⟩. We notice that the triple integral
⟨v1v2v3
12σ(v12)⟩needs to be computed for every time in-
terval, which signiﬁcantly slows down the mapping cal-
culations. However, it can be shown that the integration
results are only sensitive to ω/
√
T ∝ω/vrms times βσc,

10
Yang et al.
Figure 6. Scale-free SIDM halo central density evolution under a constant cross section (red solid) and a velocity-dependent
cross section model (black solid). In each panel the re-scaled constant cross section gravothermal solutions given by the method
introduced in Section 5 and O22 are presented in the green dashed curve and magenta dotted curve, respectively. We consider
four diﬀerent cross section models with ˆω = 0.01, 0.1, 0.3, 1.0 and compare the numerical solution with the re-scaled results
in the top left, top right, bottom left, and bottom right panels. Both mapping methods show reasonable agreement with the
gravothermal numerical solutions. We notice that O22 is slightly more accurate in mapping the core collapsing time, while this
work more accurately reproduces the halo evolution before its central density reaches a minimum.
we therefore create a lookup table for the integration re-
sult spanning in parameter range 0.01 ≤ω/vrms ≤100
and use the linearly interpolated integration results to
achieve fast mapping.
To map a set of constant cross section gravothermal
solutions with parameters {βa, ˆσc,a} to those assuming a
velocity-dependent cross section model with parameters
{βb, ˆσc,b, ˆω}, we perform the following steps:
1. Compute the time step δˆta = {ˆt0
a, ˆt1
a −ˆt0
a, ..., ˆtN
a −
ˆtN−1
a
}.
2. Compute
the
mapped
time
step
δˆtb
=
[βaˆσc,a/βb][⟨v1v2v3
12⟩ˆta/⟨v1v2v3
12ˆσb(v12)⟩ˆta]δˆta.
Here ⟨x⟩ˆta implies computing the averaged x over
a MB distribution where the temperature is given
by the constant cross section gravothermal solu-
tions at the innermost radius and time ˆta.
We
choose the halo central temperature as a charac-
teristic value at every time step with the same
argument as discussed in Section 5.
3. Sum over all δˆtb to obtain a new time axis such
that ˆxb(ˆr, ˆtb) = ˆxa(ˆr, ˆta).
Assuming that in the idealized N-Body simulation
β does not vary with ω, we compare the mapped
gravothermal solutions and Arepo N-Body simulations
under velocity-dependent cross section models intro-
duced by Eq 2 with diﬀerent ω.
We ﬁnd excellent
matches, as presented in Figure 7. We notice that this
comparison is only performed in a limited ω ≥400 km/s
range for this Milky Way sized halo. Ideally, we would
extend this comparison to cross section models with

σ(v) mapping
11
stronger velocity dependency, i.e. with even lower char-
acteristic velocity ω.
However, a halo collapses more
slowly as ω decreases, which makes the N-Body simu-
lation less stable and computationally more expensive.
Furthermore, for the Milky Way sized halo we simulate
in this work ω ≤400 km/s is a less interesting scenario,
where the halo collapsing time is much longer than the
age of the universe.
We also show the gravothermal solution mapped by
O22 in the magenta dotted curves in Figure 7. Speciﬁ-
cally, O22 suggests to deﬁne the averaged heat conduc-
tivity as:
⟨κlmfp⟩∝Kn = ⟨vn
12σ(v12)⟩
⟨vn
12⟩

rmin,tρc,min
, n = 3 .
(22)
It is emphasized in O22 that the assumption ⟨κlmfp⟩∝
K3 should be further tested by N-Body simulations. We
ﬁnd this assumption overestimates the eﬀective cross
section as well as the heat conductivity, leading to a
faster core collapse than the N-Body results. However,
we ﬁnd assuming ⟨κlmfp⟩∝K5 and a linear time re-
scaling gives mapping performance as precise as Eq 21.
This good match is also proved independently by Yang
& Yu (2022) through N-body simulations.
7. EXTEND THE LMFP MAPPING METHOD TO
MORE GENERAL CASES
The lmfp gravothermal solution mapping method in-
troduced in Section 4-6 can be easily generalized to the
smfp regime as well as to the intermediate regime. How-
ever, in this work we do not test the validity of the smfp
and intermediate regime mapping methods introduced
in this section due to diﬃculties in both computation
and physics. Neither will we apply these mappings in the
following sections. From the computational aspect, we
ﬁnd the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism introduced in Sec-
tion 3 runs into numerical issues when solving systems
with very large cross section. Furthermore, the Arepo
idealized SIDM simulation pipeline introduced in Sec-
tion 2 is not tested for isolated halos with cross section
greater than 60 cm2/g. From the aspect of physics, a
very large SIDM cross section may change the structure
formation from that of CDM. The initial density proﬁle
of the large cross section SIDM halo is also uncertain
and unlikely to be NFW (Ahn & Shapiro 2003).
Let us ﬁrst revisit Eq 9 in the fully smfp regime. Now
since we switch focus from ˆκlmfp ∝βˆσ to ˆκsmfp ∝1/ˆσ,
it becomes clear that the time mapping relation changes
from βaˆσaˆta ↔βbˆσbˆtb to ˆta/ˆσa ↔ˆtb/ˆσb for the constant
SIDM cross section models. For the relative velocity de-
pendent cross section scenarios one only needs to modify
the time interval mapping as:
δˆtb =
⟨v3
12⟩ˆta/ˆσc,a
⟨v3
12/ˆσb(v12)⟩ˆta
δˆta ,
(23)
to map gravothermal solutions computed under constant
cross sections ˆσc,a to those assuming velocity dependent
cross section models ˆσb(v12). Here one v12 term in the
MB integration comes from the mean free path λ and
another v2
12 term comes from the energy transfer as has
been discussed in Section 6. The two key diﬀerences be-
tween the lmfp and smfp mapping methods are: (1) The
smfp heat conductivity and, therefore, the gravothermal
solutions are no longer dependent on the free parameter
β. (2). In the lmfp regime a halo collapses faster with a
larger cross section, but the situation is reversed in the
smfp regime.
To consider the intermediate regime where the mean
free path and the scale height are comparable, the time
mapping relation among constant cross section models
has form ˆκaˆta ↔ˆκbˆtb, where ˆκ = 1/(ˆκ−1
lmfp + ˆκ−1
smfp). For
the relative velocity dependent cross section scenarios
the time interval mapping relation is:
δˆtb = ⟨ˆκav2
12⟩ˆta
⟨ˆκbv2
12⟩ˆta
δˆta ,
(24)
here the v12 terms in the MB integration comes again
from the energy transfer. The challenge of computing
Eq 24 compared to the asymptotic lmfp and smfp sce-
narios is that constant parameters β, ˆσc, as well as the
scale-free density ˆρ can no longer be pulled out from
the integration due to this more complicated heat con-
ductivity expression.
It is therefore necessary to pre-
pare a 4D lookup table that simultaneously covers the
variations of {β, ˆσc, ˆω/ˆvrms, ˆρ} to achieve fast mapping
calculations.
8. OBSERVATIONAL CONSTRAINTS ON THE
CROSS SECTION MODEL
Both the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism and idealized
N-Body simulations are computationally expensive in
the sense that they cannot be directly used to explore
the continuous SIDM particle parameter space.
The
strength of the lmfp mapping method introduced in
this work is that one needs to numerically solve for the
gravothermal ﬂuid equations only once, and can then
extend this solution to halos with arbitrary cross sec-
tion models, as long as the halo is mostly evolving in
the lmfp regime. It therefore serves as a powerful tool
for deriving constraints on SIDM cross section model
parameters.
Halos hosting dwarfs and LSB galaxies are promis-
ing laboratories for constraining SIDM models because

12
Yang et al.
Figure 7. Comparisons of halo central density time evolution between the averaged Arepo N-Body simulation results (black
solid curve) and the mapped gravothermal solutions (green dashed curves) under diﬀerent velocity dependent cross section
models. In each panel, the maximum and minimum halo central density among the ﬁve Arepo realizations are enclosed by
the gray band. The red curve shows the gravothermal solution that matches with N-Body assuming a constant cross section
σ = 30 cm2/g, which is identical to the red curve shown in Figure 2. We use β = 0.82 as calibrated in Figure 4, and assume it
does not vary with ω. We ﬁnd the mapping method introduced in this work matches with Arepo N-Body simulation results
extremely well. It outperforms the ⟨κlmfp⟩∝K3 deﬁnition, which is assumed as an ansatz in O22. We also ﬁnd under a linear
time re-scaling, the deﬁnition of the averaged heat conductivity ⟨κlmfp⟩∝K5 performs equally as well as Eq 21.
these small galaxies serve as powerful tracers of the DM
halo density proﬁle, while their shallow baryonic poten-
tials leave little inﬂuence on the DM dynamics (although
see Pontzen & Governato 2012; Read et al. 2016 for ex-
ample). As a demonstration of the utility of this work,
we constrain the cross section model parameter space
favored by the rotation curve measurement of a LSB
dwarf galaxy UGC 128 (van der Hulst et al. 1993; Ka-
mada et al. 2017). We select UGC 128 because in this
system the circular velocity is mostly determined by the
dark matter component, while the stellar disc has neg-
ligible eﬀect (Kamada et al. 2017). The fact that our
model does not capture baryonic physics is therefore
not expected to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the SIDM param-
eters inferred from UGC 128’s rotation curve. We notice
that the rotation curves of dozens of dwarf/LSB galax-
ies have been measured carefully (e.g. Kuzio de Naray
et al. 2008; Oh et al. 2015; Essig et al. 2019).
Some
of the measurements have been used to derive stringent
upper bounds on cross section models (e.g. Read et al.
2018; Jiang et al. 2021). While a careful and thorough
exploration of the SIDM cross section model parameter
space using all the available dwarf/LSB observational
data will be an important step to take, in this work
we choose to show just an example application of the
gravothermal solution mapping method. We therefore
illustrate parameter space regions favored by the data
on UGC 128 alone and defer a more complete analysis
of a larger dwarf/LSB galaxy sample to a subsequent
work. In this work we trust the UGC 128 rotation curve
measurement and ignore potential error underestimation
caused by beam smearing, coherent turbulence, the lack
of determination of pressure support, and the treatment
of inclination errors (Oman et al. 2019; Sellwood et al.
2021). The derived constraints can therefore be over-
tightened.
We assume β = 0.5 and a halo evolution time of
10 Gyr. We then use emcee (Foreman-Mackey et al.
2013) to conduct the MCMC sampling over the 4D
parameter space −2.5 ≤log σc/[cm2/g] ≤4.0, 0.0 ≤
log ω/[km/s] ≤4.0, 5.0 ≤log ρs/[M⊙/kpc3] ≤8.0, and
−1.0 ≤log rs/[kpc] ≤2.0, assuming uniform priors on
these logarithmic variables. Here σc and ω are parame-
ters introduced by the velocity dependent cross section
model σ(v12) = σc/(1 + v2
12/ω2)2, and {ρs, rs} are the
NFW proﬁle scaling parameters. In each MCMC step
we use the gravothermal mapping method introduced in
Section 6 to compute the halo density proﬁle at t = 10
Gyr, and transfer the dark matter density proﬁle to ro-
tation curve through vcirc(r) =
p
GM(< r)/r.
Here
vcirc(r) is the circular velocity at radius r. We adopt a
Gaussian likelihood function to direct 20 MCMC ran-
dom walkers with the UGC 128 rotation curve measure-
ment. To get a quantitative sense of how strongly the
baryonic gravitational potential in this system may in-
ﬂuence the parameter ﬁtting results, we perform two in-
dependent MCMC ﬁts for the total rotation curve and
the dark matter halo rotation curve, respectively. Con-
tributions to the rotation curve from stars and gas are
ﬁt by Kamada et al. (2017). A triangle plot for the pa-
rameter constraints is presented in Figure 8 left panel.
The MCMC ﬁtting results show that the NFW pa-
rameters ρs and rs are more sensitive to the diﬀerences
between the total and dark matter only rotation curves,
while the log σc−log rs parameter constraints show little
response to this data variation. This is fortunate as we
are generally more interested in learning about the cross
section parameters rather than ﬁtting NFW parameters

σ(v) mapping
13
2
0
2
log
c
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
logrs
6.2
6.4
6.6
log
s
1
2
3
log
1
2
3
log
6.2
6.4
6.6
log
s
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
logrs
total RC
DM RC
2
0
2
log
c
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
logrs
6.2
6.4
6.6
log
s
1
2
3
log
1
2
3
log
6.2
6.4
6.6
log
s
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
logrs
total RC
DM RC
Figure 8. Parameter constraints for the NFW initial condition Eq 1 and the cross section model Eq 2 resulting from dwarf
galaxy UGC 128 (van der Hulst et al. 1993; Kamada et al. 2017) rotation curve measurements. We ﬁx β = 0.5 and a halo
evolution time of 10 Gyr. We assume Gaussian likelihood for the total/DM only rotation curve measurements and show the
parameter space favored by observation in red/blue regions.
The contours enclose parameter constraints at 68% and 95%
conﬁdence levels. The left panel shows MCMC ﬁtting results derived from the original UGC 128 rotation curve, while for the
right panel the rotation curve error bars for the innermost three radius bins (r ≤5 kpc) are enlarged by a factor of 2 to account
for potential measurement uncertainty underestimation.
of diﬀerent halos with high accuracy. However, the gen-
erality of this feature should be further tested using a
larger observational sample.
The MCMC results also show that the NFW scaling
parameters ρs and rs are degenerate. This is expected
since the density proﬁle amplitude increase caused by
increasing ρs can be compensated by decreasing rs,
which eﬀectively shifts the halo density proﬁle to smaller
radii.
Despite this parameter degeneracy we are still
able to constrain {ρs, rs} within a range much nar-
rower than the ﬂat priors. The best-ﬁt NFW param-
eters for this halo ﬁtted from the total rotation curve
are log ρs/[M⊙/kpc3] = 6.49+0.17
−0.16 and log rs/[kpc] =
1.34 ± 0.09 (1σ errors). For the rotation curve with the
ﬁtted stellar disc and gas components subtracted, the
best-ﬁt NFW scales are log ρs/[M⊙/kpc3] = 6.40 ± 0.17
and log rs/[kpc] = 1.35 ± 0.10. There is a “L”-shaped
degeneracy between the cross section parameters log σc
and log ω. One can also see such a degeneracy from the
asymptotic behavior of the cross section model. Speciﬁ-
cally, the cross section model reduces to the constant fac-
tor σc for high ω, and the parameter constraints become
independent of ω. On the other hand, lowering ω eﬀec-
tively decreases the cross section, resulting in a weaker
upper bound on σc. The turn over of this “L”-shaped
band occurs on a scale comparable to the characteris-
tic rms velocity of the halo. Therefore, the degeneracy
between σc and ω can be at least partially broken by
combining similar parameter constraints for systems of
diﬀerent sizes, masses, and characteristic velocity dis-
persions, and we defer a more careful analysis to a fu-
ture work. We also emphasize that in this ﬁt we have
assumed β = 0.5 and halo evolution time of 10 Gyr.
Due to the βˆσˆt degeneracy introduced in Sections 4-6,
assuming alternative β and halo evolution time values
would rescale the σc constraints by a factor of 1/(βt).
The constraints on parameters {ω, ρs, rs} are insensitive
to the β and halo age assumptions.
The single “L”-shaped band in the log σc −log ω pa-
rameter space favored by the observed rotation curve
was a surprise to us. Speciﬁcally, we have assumed an
NFW initial density proﬁle, for which the halo central
density ﬁrst decreases, reaching a maximum core size,
and then increases with time. There will be in general
two βσt instances where the cored halo density proﬁles
are very similar to each other (unless the halo is mea-
sured to be precisely at the moment of maximum core
size, or the halo has entered the late core collapsing stage
where its central density is higher than the initial state):
one from the core formation process and another one
from the core collapsing process. The existence of two
gravothermal solutions with similar halo density proﬁles

14
Yang et al.
but very diﬀerent βˆσˆt is one of the causes of the huge
SIDM cross section constraint dispersion among diﬀer-
ent works (Kamada et al. 2020). For example, SIDM
cross sections of Milky Way’s dwarf satellite galaxies
constrained by isothermal models such as Kamada et al.
(2017) and Valli & Yu (2018) only pick out the low cross
section solution because the isothermal models by design
only works for the SIDM halo core formation process.
Cross sections constrained by isothermal-based meth-
ods are therefore relatively low, ranging from 0.1 to 40
cm2/g. On the other hand, previous studies such as Cor-
rea (2021) that use the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism to
constrain SIDM cross sections may only focus on the
halo core collapsing process, and give higher constraints
30–200 cm2/g for similar systems.
We ﬁnd the “L”-
shaped band favored by the UGC 128 rotation curve
points to one solution during the core formation pro-
cess. As an example, we pick one point in the best-ﬁt
parameter space σc = 1 cm2/g, ω = 104 km/s, and
compare the mapped halo density proﬁle as well as the
rotation curve at t = 10 Gyr with observations in Fig-
ure 9. We show the best-ﬁt gravothermal solutions to
the total and DM only rotation curves in black and blue
solid curves, respectively. We ﬁnd ﬁxing the best-ﬁt ρs,
rs, and ω values, but enlarging σc to about 100 cm2/g
gives very similar mapped halo density proﬁle at t = 10
Gyr, although under such a large cross section the halo
has started core collapse. The gravothermal solutions
with identical halo central density to the best-ﬁt solu-
tion, but a much larger cross section is shown in dashed
lines in Figure 9. The red/green dashed line corresponds
to the total/DM only rotation curve case. We show in
the right panel of Figure 9 that, for either the total
or the DM only case, rotation curve measurements of
UGC 128 at radii less than about 5 kpc do not favor
either one of those two gravothermal solutions, owning
to their similar halo central densities.
To clarify the
origin of this tight cross section constraint from UGC
128, in the left panel of Figure 9 we compare these two
sets of gravothermal solutions to NFW proﬁles with the
total/DM-only rotation curve best-ﬁt {ρs, rs} parame-
ters, shown in black/blue dotted curve. During the halo
core formation process where σc = 1 cm2/g, the halo
density proﬁle is only suppressed in the cored region
(r ≲5 kpc) compared to the NFW initial condition.
However, for the σc ≈100 cm2/g case the halo density
is altered by DM self-interactions over a larger radial
range (r ≲100 kpc). As a result the halo density proﬁle
outside the cored region becomes steeper than the initial
NFW proﬁle. This subtle diﬀerence is distinguishable by
the rotation curve measurements outside the isothermal
core. However, we emphasize that all the above analy-
sis relies on the assumption that the UGC 128 rotation
curve data and its measurements uncertainties are sta-
tistically valid.
The rotation curve error bars can be
underestimated, especially at the galaxy central region,
due to center oﬀsets, non-circular motions, inclination,
the eﬀects of pressure support, and many other obser-
vational uncertainties (see de Blok 2010 for a review).
While a careful reprocessing of the UGC 128 rotation
curve data is beyond the scope of this work, we attempt
to account for potentially underestimated uncertainties
through increasing the UGC 128 rotation curve error
bars of the innermost three radius bins, where the radius
is less than 5 kpc, by a factor of 2. The MCMC ﬁtting re-
sults are shown in Figure 8 right panel. Assuming larger
measurement uncertainties near the galaxy center, the
“L”-shaped bands in the log σc −log ω space become
signiﬁcantly wider such that cross sections as large as
σc ∼100 cm2/g can be preferred by the rotation curve
measurement at 95% conﬁdence level.
We note that dissipative cooling processes (Essig et al.
2019), the eﬀects of a baryonic disc (Jiang et al. 2022),
and tidal eﬀects (Zeng et al. 2022) can all speed up
the onset of halo core collapse.
On the other hand,
Meshveliani et al. (2022) suggests that halo mass ac-
cretion and merger can delay the core collapse process,
and proposes a correction term to the halo core collaps-
ing time in order to account for this eﬀect. However,
the goal of this work is simply to introduce a convenient
non-linear time rescaling method for the gravothermal
ﬂuid formalism without considering any of the above
eﬀects. Nevertheless, such a preliminary constraint al-
ready shows the advantage of our mapping method in
the sense that it can rapidly explore the continuous pa-
rameter space, and clearly present the parameter degen-
eracies.
9. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this work we introduce a fast mapping method
that transfers the gravothermal ﬂuid formalism solu-
tions from the constant cross section scenario to arbi-
trary velocity-dependent cross section models. Such a
mapping is intrinsically built in the gravothermal ﬂuid
formalism. Speciﬁcally, when a halo is evolved fully in
either the lmfp or the smfp regime, cross section only
inﬂuences the heat conductivity of the isolated halo at
each radius and moment, which further determines the
halo evolution rate.
Varying the cross section model
assumptions therefore only re-maps the time axis of the
halo evolution, but has no eﬀect on the radial proﬁle am-
plitudes/shapes of halo density, velocity, enclosed mass,
etc. Such a time re-mapping is linear between two dif-
ferent constant cross sections, but becomes non-linear

σ(v) mapping
15
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
r [kpc]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
vcirc [km/s]
Gas
Stars
total RC
DM RC
100
101
102
103
r [kpc]
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
 [M
/kpc3]
c = 1 cm2/g
c
100 cm2/g
NFW
Figure 9. The best-ﬁt halo density proﬁles (left) and rotation curves (right) at 10 Gyr, assuming β = 0.5 but diﬀerent SIDM
cross sections. The black/blue solid curves show the best-ﬁt mapped gravothermal solution to the total/DM only rotation curve.
These two best-ﬁt solutions correspond to a small cross section σc = 1 cm2/g, ω = 104 km/s.The red/green dashed lines show
mapped gravothermal solutions under a larger cross section σc ≈100 cm2/g, ω = 104 km/s, but identical halo central densities
to the total/DM only rotation curve best-ﬁt solutions. Compared to the NFW proﬁles with the total/DM only rotation curve
best-ﬁt {ρs, rs} parameters shown by the black/blue dotted curves, density proﬁles for the σc = 1 cm2/g case is only suppressed
in the cored region, while a larger region in the halo is inﬂuenced by the DM self-interaction for the σc ≈100 cm2/g case. Only
the small cross section solutions match the observed total/DM only rotation curves, shown by black/blue data points. The
purple and pink dotted curves show rotation curves contributed by gas and stars in UGC 128, ﬁtted by Kamada et al. (2017).
between constant and velocity dependent cross section
models.
The thermal conductivity of a SIDM halo varies at
diﬀerent radii and times. To achieve fast mapping we
use the thermal conductivity at the halo center at each
instance as a characteristic value. We test the perfor-
mance of this mapping method through comparing the
mapped gravothermal solutions, assuming a constant
cross section, with actual gravothermal numerical solu-
tions assuming diﬀerent velocity dependent cross section
models. We ﬁnd that the fast mapping method intro-
duced in this work nicely captures the full time evolu-
tion of a SIDM halo, although it slightly overestimates
the core collapsing time due to the simpliﬁed assump-
tion about the halo instantaneous heat conductivity. We
show that the accuracy of this mapping method can be
further boosted through a more careful treatment of the
instantaneous heat conductivity calculation, but argue
that since the fractional error of the default mapping
is small compared to the uncertainties of halo evolution
time and the free parameter β, the more complicated
mapping method is unnecessary.
Calibrating gravothermal solutions with N-Body sim-
ulations under the assumption of a velocity dependent
cross section is more challenging since in numerical sim-
ulations the particle scattering probabilities are gener-
ally determined by their relative velocities, while the
constant cross section gravothermal ﬂuid formalism only
cares about the particle rms velocity/velocity dispersion
in each radial shell. Assuming the SIDM particle ve-
locity in each halo shell follows the Maxwell-Boltzman
distribution, we deﬁne the averaged thermal conductiv-
ity as ⟨κlmfp⟩∝⟨v1v2v3
12σ(v12)⟩, where v1, v2 are the
velocities of two particles, and v12 is the relative veloc-
ity. The velocity terms in the MB-distribution averaging
bracket are contributed by particle orbiting scales, col-
lisional relaxation times, and energy transfer. We show
that this physically motivated deﬁnition of the averaged
heat conductivity provides an excellent match between
the mapped gravothermal solutions and Arepo ideal-
ized N-Body simulation results, assuming multiple dif-
ferent velocity dependent cross section models.
The advantage of this mapping method lies in its high
computational eﬃciency. Speciﬁcally, it takes about 24
CPU hours of computation with our gravothermal ﬂuid
code to reach the core-collapse regime for an SIDM halo
in the lmfp regime, and introducing a velocity dependent
cross section model brings at least two extra degree-of-
freedom. It is therefore impractical to continuously ex-
plore the cross section model parameter space directly
with the gravothermal ﬂuid code. Luckily, by adopting
the mapping method introduced in this work one only
needs to solve the ﬂuid code for once, and can fast map
this set of numerical solutions to halos with arbitrary
cross section assumptions. Besides deriving parameter
constraints, this mapping method is also suitable to be

16
Yang et al.
implemented into semi-analytic galaxy formation mod-
els in order to achieve fast SIDM halo population gen-
eration.
As an example application, we select the LSB system
UGC 128 where the baryonic disc potential has negligi-
ble inﬂuence on the galaxy rotation curve, and use the
mapping method to constrain 4 free parameters in the
NFW and velocity-dependent cross section models. We
have assumed β = 0.5 and a halo evolution time of 10
Gyr, but we show analytically that the βt assumption
will only re-scale constraints of the cross section scaling
parameter σc.
The other three parameters {ω, ρs, rs}
are not sensitive to the assumed β and halo age values.
To get a quantitative sense of how much the baryonic
gravitational potential in this system may inﬂuence the
parameter ﬁtting results, we perform two independent
MCMC ﬁts for the total rotation curve and the dark
matter halo rotation curve, respectively, ﬁnding that
the SIDM parameters of interest are unaﬀected.
We
also show that the accurately measured UGC128 rota-
tion curve can distinguish two very similar gravothermal
solutions during the core formation and core collapsing
phases, and favors the low cross section solution. We no-
tice that the constraints derived in this work do not ac-
count for other possible non-linear eﬀects that can inﬂu-
ence the halo core collapsing time, including cooling, an
additional gravitational potential contributed by a bary-
onic disc or black hole, tidal eﬀects, halo mass accretion,
and merger. The constraints can be too tight since we
have trusted the UGC128 rotation curve measurements,
and have ignored possible error underestimation. Never-
theless the advantage of this fast gravothermal solution
mapping method is recognized in the sense that it can
quickly explore the continuous 4D parameter space with
the ﬁrst-principle gravothermal solutions, and eﬀectively
capture degeneracies among the SIDM halo parameters
of interest.
We also compare the performance of this mapping
method with a similar strategy proposed in O22. We
ﬁnd the simpler method introduced in O22, where the
characteristic heat conductivity is assumed to be a
time and radius independent constant, outperforms the
method introduced in this work in reproducing the core
collapse time when mapping between gravothermal so-
lutions with vrms dependent cross section models. How-
ever, this work performs better in mapping the full halo
evolution process, while O22 fails to capture the halo
central density evolution before the instant of maximum
core size if the cross section model has strong velocity
dependency. Correctly mapping the SIDM halo core for-
mation process is as important as capturing the core col-
lapse time because: 1) most current SIDM cosmological
simulations evolve halos with mild self-interaction cross
section for only around 10 Gyr, such that the simula-
tion stops before an isothermal core has been completely
formed (e.g. Elbert et al. 2015; Nadler et al. 2020), and
2) observations may prefer a SIDM model with small
cross section.
If this is the case, most halos hosting
observable galaxy clusters/galaxies/dwarfs are still ap-
proaching their maximum core size.
O22 propose to
estimate the averaged thermal conductivity in a par-
ticle relative velocity dependent scenario as ⟨κlmfp⟩∝
⟨vn
12σ(v12)⟩, where n is to be calibrated to N-Body sim-
ulations. We ﬁnd that a physically motivated deﬁnition
⟨κlmfp⟩∝⟨v1v2v3
12σ(v12)⟩outperforms the ansatz as-
sumed in O22, where n = 3. However, we show that
combining the linear time re-scaling method introduced
by O22 and the deﬁnition ⟨κlmfp⟩∝⟨v5
12σ(v12)⟩, also
suggested by Yang & Yu (2022), gives an equally good
match to the N-Body simulation results as ⟨κlmfp⟩∝
⟨v1v2v3
12σ(v12)⟩.
10. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Yiming Zhong for sharing his gravothermal
ﬂuid code, and for many helpful discussions. We thank
Mark Vogelsberger for sharing the Arepo N-body simu-
lation package including the SIDM module. Computing
resources used in this work were made available by a
generous grant from the Ahmanson Foundation. This
work was supported in part by the NASA Astrophysics
Theory Program under grant 80NSSC18K1014.
APPENDIX
A. AN EMPIRICAL MODEL FOR THE LMFP GRAVOTHERMAL DENSITY PROFILES.
In this appendix we introduce a convenient empirical model for the density proﬁle of SIDM halos, calibrated to the
lmfp gravothermal solution used in this work.
Balberg et al. (2002) has proved that the gravothermal density proﬁle evolves with time self-similarly, and the density
in the halo outskirts falls with radius as ˆρ ∝ˆr−2.19. This derivation is elegant, but not directly applicable to most of
the numerical SIDM simulations. Speciﬁcally, in most idealized N-Body as well as some cosmological simulations the
halo starts from an NFW initial state where ˆρ ∝ˆr−3 at large radii. As a result, when a core has been formed the halo

σ(v) mapping
17
density still drops as ˆρ ∝ˆr−2.19 slightly outside the core radius. At even larger radii the density proﬁle joins smoothly
with the NFW initial condition, and drops as ˆρ ∝ˆr−3. At this stage the halo density proﬁle can be captured by a
triple power law.
We ﬁrst deﬁne the instant of halo core collapse as the time at which the halo central density diverges:
log(βˆσˆt) = E = 2.238 ,
(A1)
and the instant of maximum core size as the time when the halo central density reaches its minimum:
log(βˆσˆt) = F = 1.341 .
(A2)
We ﬁnd at the early stage of the halo evolution, i.e. log(βˆσˆt) < F, the halo density proﬁle can still be described by
the NFW proﬁle multiplied by a tanh central cut:
ˆρ = tanh(ˆr/rcore)
ˆr(1 + ˆr)2
,
(A3)
where we use free parameter rcore to capture the core size. We ﬁnd the following empirical model described the time
evolution of the halo core size at log(βˆσˆt) ≤1.341 with high accuracy:
log rcore = Arcore(log(βˆσˆt))2 + Brcore log(βˆσˆt) + Crcore .
(A4)
Here Arcore = −0.1078, Brcore = 0.3737, Crcore = −0.7720 are calibrated to the gravothermal solutions.
As mentioned before, in later phases of halo evolution, log(βˆσˆt) > 1.341, when a core has been formed, the density
proﬁle can be described by triple power law:
ˆρ(ˆr) =
ρcore
1 +

ˆr
rcore
s 
1 +
ˆr
rout
3−s .
(A5)
Here s = 2.19 is provided by Balberg et al. (2002) gravothermal solution self-similar analysis. Again we use free
parameter rcore to trace the characteristic halo core size at each time step. Similarly, the parameter ρcore captures the
halo central density, and rout traces the radius where the density proﬁle inﬂuenced by self-interaction joins smoothly
to the NFW outskirts. We develop the following empirical model for ρcore, rcore, and rout, calibrated to the lmfp
gravothermal solution:
log ρcore = Aρcore(log βˆσˆt −(E + 3))2 + Cρcore +
Dρcore
(E + 0.0001 −log βˆσˆt)0.02 ,
(A6)
where Aρcore = 0.05771, Cρcore = −21.64, Dρcore = 21.11,
log rcore = Arcore(log βˆσˆt −(E + 2))2 + Crcore +
Drcore
(E + 0.0001 −log βˆσˆt)0.005 ,
(A7)
where Arcore = −0.04049, Crcore = 43.07, Drcore = −43.07, and
log rout = Arout(log βˆσˆt −(E + 2))2 + Crout +
Drout
(E + 0.04 −log βˆσˆt)0.005 ,
(A8)
where Arout = 0.02403, Crout = −4.724, Drout = 5.011.
We compare the halo density proﬁle given by the gravothermal solution and this empirical model at ﬁve characteristic
moments in Figure 10. This simple empirical model accurately captures the overall time evolution and radial trend
of the gravothermal solutions throughout the halo evolution process. We also show the halo central density using
the exact result from the gravothermal ﬂuid model and our empirical model (along with their fractional diﬀerence)
in Figure 11. The fractional error of this empirical model is better than 10% at most times. Even at the very late
core collapsing stage its accuracy is still better than 50%. This degree of accuracy is suﬃcient for many applications,
considering the fact that the random ﬂuctuations in N-Body simulation results can cause the halo central density
to ﬂuctuate at a similar level. The fractional error shows non-continuous behavior at the maximum core moment

18
Yang et al.
10
2
10
1
100
101
r
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
103
104
log
c
NFW
Core forming
Maximum core
Early collapse
Late collapse
Figure 10. Density proﬁle comparisons between the gravothermal solutions and the empirical model introduced in this section.
We compare the numerical solution and empirical model at the halo initial state βˆσˆt = 0 (red), core formation state βˆσˆt < F =
1.341 (green), maximum core moment βˆσˆt = F (blue), early core collapse βˆσˆt = 150 (magenta), and the late core collapse state
βˆσˆt = E = 2.238 (cyan). The gravothermal solution density proﬁles are shown as faint solid curves, while the empirical model
predictions are shown in the dashed lines.
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
t
101
102
103
c
gravothermal
model
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
t
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(
model
c
gravo
c
)/
gravo
c
Figure 11. Left: Halo central density time evolution comparisons between the gravothermal solutions (black solid curve) and
empirical model (red dashed curve) introduced in this section. Right: Fractional error of the empirical model in reproducing
the halo central density given by the gravothermal solutions.
βˆσˆt = 1.341 because we switch the density proﬁle empirical description from a tanh cutoﬀto the triple power law
here.
This analytic empirical model has wide applications. For example, it can be implemented into semi-analytic galaxy
formation models for fast SIDM halo simulation. As another example, we show in Section 5 that the characteristic
radius rout provided by this model can be used to boost the accuracy of the mapping method introduced in this work.
