Prepared for submission to JCAP
MARVELously Dark: the density
profile evolution of dwarf halos in
velocity-dependent SIDM
Anna Engelhardt
ID
a,1 Ferah Munshi
ID
a Annika H. G. Peter
ID
b,c Ethan O. Nadler
ID
d Akaxia Cruz
ID
e,f Alyson M. Brooks
ID
g
Zhichao Carton Zeng
ID
h Thomas R. Quinn
ID
i Blake Keith
ID
a
aDepartment of Physics & Astronomy, George Mason University,
4400 University Drive, MSN: 3F3 Fairfax, VA 22030-4444, USA
bDepartment of Physics and Center for Cosmology and AstroParticle Physics, The Ohio
State University,
191 W. Woodruff Ave., Columbus, OH 43210
cDepartment of Astronomy, The Ohio State University,
140 18th Ave. W., Columbus, OH 43210
dDepartment of Astronomy & Astrophysics, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
eCenter for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute,
162 Fifth Ave, New York, NY 10010, USA
fDepartment of Physics, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
gDepartment of Physics & Astronomy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
136 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
hDepartment of Physics & Astronomy, Texas A&M University,
400 Bizzell St. College Station, TX. 77843, USA
iAstronomy Department, University of Washington,
Box 351580, Seattle, WA, 98195-1580
1Corresponding author.
arXiv:2601.23264v3  [astro-ph.GA]  11 Jun 2026

E-mail: aengelha@gmu.edu
Abstract. Self-interacting dark matter (SIDM) with a sufficiently large cross section has been
shown to naturally produce constant dark matter (DM) cores, as well as core-collapse, at the
centers of dwarf halos on cosmic timescales, potentially reducing tensions with observation.
Here, we present halos from a new dark matter only (DMO) cosmological (SIDM) simulation:
Ms.Marvel DMO with a velocity-dependent self-interaction cross section with σ/mmax = 50
cm2/g at vmax = 35 km/s.
We compare these to the CDM suite of Storm simulations
including both DMO and dark matter + hydrodynamics runs, in order to test core-formation
(and core-collapse) across different dark matter models. We show that Ms.Marvel DMO can
reproduce core slopes consistent with observations of isolated dwarf galaxies and more massive
(Mvir ≳1010M⊙) CDM dwarf halos that include stellar feedback from the matched CDM run
(Storm CDM+baryons). We identify nine Ms.Marvel SIDM DMO halos in the core-collapse
phase of gravothermal evolution with halo masses below 2 × 109M⊙. We find that using the
inner density slope to measure the core-collapse timescales of Ms.Marvel DMO halos agrees
well with predicted collapse times estimated with the parametric model for SIDM halos
introduced by [1]. Additionally, compared to central density, the inner density slope is less
sensitive to both the radius of measurement and halo merger history. These results indicate
that the slope of the inner DM density profile more cleanly differentiates core-collapsed versus
core-forming halos than central density amplitude.

Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Simulations and Methodology
4
2.1
Halo identification and sample
4
2.2
Ms.Marvel DMO
4
2.3
Storm CDM DMO
7
2.4
Storm CDM+baryons
7
3
Results
8
3.1
Core formation in SIDM and CDM simulations
8
3.2
Tracing inner density slope and central density through time
11
3.2.1
Inner density slopes
13
3.2.2
Central densities
14
3.3
Core-collapsed Ms.Marvel DMO halos
15
3.4
Parameterization of gravothermal evolution
18
4
Discussion
21
4.1
A comparison to other SIDM simulations
22
4.2
Tracing inner density slope at different radii
23
4.3
Tracing central density at different radii
25
4.4
Potential kinematic signatures of core-collapse
26
4.5
Tidal effects in SIDM subhalos
27
4.6
Halo mergers and substructure in SIDM halos
28
5
Conclusions
29
5.1
Future work
30
A Using central density as a measurement of core-collapse
31
B Turndown in Central Density at Late Times
32
C Resolution dependence on particle number
33
D Density Profiles of Ms.Marvel Halos
35
1
Introduction
Dwarf galaxies, being the most numerous and dark matter (DM)-dominated systems in the
universe, have long been a fertile testing ground for the cold dark matter (CDM) paradigm.
Although the CDM framework has been largely successful in explaining the observed uni-
verse [see 2], several issues arose when observations and simulations began to thoroughly
explore the small-scale regime. Contentions such as the “missing satellites” problem [3–5],
the “too big to fail” problem [6, 7], and the “cusp-core” problem [8–10] all call into question
the fidelity of both cosmological simulations and the CDM framework itself. These tensions
are primarily alleviated in the CDM paradigm through the inclusion of baryonic physics,
– 1 –

with a focus on stellar feedback, in cosmological simulations [11–31]. However, alternative
DM models, such as self-interacting dark matter (SIDM), remain valid possibilities [32–39].
Over the past decade, particle physicists have begun studying a broader range of DM mod-
els, many of which naturally produce self-interactions [40–55]. Thus, the in-depth study of
dwarf galaxies simulated with alternative DM is complementary to the efforts being made
by particle physicists to constrain DM models.
Previous work [56, 57] shows that, in CDM halos, cores are formed and sustained through
the stellar feedback induced by repeated bursts of star formation. As a result, in low-mass
halos, which have fewer stars and less extended star formation histories (SFHs), baryonic
feedback is insufficient to convert cusps into cores. However, [58] and [59] find evidence of
central density cores in observed dwarf satellite galaxies, with stellar masses of 103−4M⊙
and 106−8M⊙respectively, from their surface brightness profiles and stellar surface density
profiles. For low-luminosity galaxies with MB ≳−19, [60] find that dark matter halos prefer
cored profiles over cusped profiles. Additionally, [61] find evidence of central DM density
slopes, the slope of the DM density profile at inner radii, that are shallower than predic-
tions from simulations [62, 63] between stellar masses of 105−8M⊙. The rotation curves of
observed spiral galaxies may also be more diverse than predictions from CDM simulations
[64–67], however, [68] find that dwarf galaxies from the MARVELous dwarf simulations are
capable of reproducing the observed diversity of rotation curves in the ΛCDM paradigm.
These tensions with the ΛCDM paradigm may be resolved by alternative DM models
such as SIDM. In SIDM halos, self-scattering among the DM particles causes the central halo
to dynamically heat, leading to heat inflow towards the center of the halo. The subsequent
negative heat capacity at the center of the halo causes a runaway gravothermal collapse
process, with core-collapsed halos becoming denser and cuspier in the central region than
their CDM counterparts [69–85]. SIDM halos can successfully reproduce the observed diver-
sity of galactic rotation curves [65, 86–90]. Also, [18] find that observed galaxies are better
fit by an isothermal core, such as those that are naturally formed in SIDM halos. SIDM
simulations successfully reproduce the cored DM density profiles of observed bright dwarfs
[32, 34, 36, 39, 88, 91–96], and reproduce the successes of CDM at galaxy cluster mass scales
[37, 43]. Also, [18] find that observed galaxies are better fit by an isothermal core, such as
those that are naturally formed in SIDM halos. SIDM simulations have also been shown
to successfully match the observed diversity of DM profiles, subhalo mass function, and the
radial number density of the Milky Ways (MWs) satellite population [78, 90, 97–100]. Fur-
thermore, the Milky Way and its satellite population can be used to constrain the interacting
cross section of SIDM [78, 90, 101–104]. For example, [105] find that for interacting cross
sections σ/m ≲5 cm2g−1 SIDM halos are unable to reproduce the densest ultra-faint and
classical dwarf spheroidal galaxies in the MW.
New and upcoming surveys such as the Vera Rubin Observatory (Rubin) and Roman
Space Telescope will enable observers to probe dark matter abundance and structure through
strong gravitational lensing as well as improved dwarf galaxy and stellar stream measure-
ments [106]. The Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) with Rubin will have high enough
resolution to allow precise measurements of the density profiles and shapes of dark matter in
dwarf galaxy halos with stellar masses down to 108M⊙based on weak lensing [107, 108] and
discover many more dwarf galaxies [109] and MW satellites [110]. Additionally, extremely
large telescopes (ELTs) will allow observers to probe the dark matter-subhalo mass function
down to halo masses of 106M⊙by targeting the MWs stellar streams and its Galactic accel-
eration field [111]. Constraints on the halo mass function and precise measurements of the
– 2 –

DM density profiles of the halos of dwarf galaxies can therefore be used to constrain DM
models.
Previous work constrains the interacting cross section for SIDM models by compar-
ing predictions from simulations with observed galaxies.
For small cross sections, SIDM
halos replicate the successful predictions of large-scale structure in the CDM paradigm
[36, 112, 113], while large cross sections at low velocities naturally create cored and core-
collapsed central density profiles at dwarf galaxy scales [32, 34, 36, 39, 43, 78, 88, 91–97].
At galaxy cluster mass scales, studies of the inner DM density profiles of galaxy clusters
place strong constraints on the interaction cross section for SIDM (σ/m ≲0.1−1.0 cm2g−1);
[36, 94, 114, 115]. At smaller scales, SIDM has been shown to naturally produce constant
density cores at the centers of isolated dwarf halos with cross sections ranging from 0.5 −50
cm2g−1, reducing tensions with the “too big to fail” and “cusp-core” problems [43, 93, 94, 97]
for classical dwarfs. However, [101] find that the centers of ultra-faints are cusped and rule
out SIDM models with a constant cross section ≥0.1cm2g−1. These varying constraints
on the cross section of interaction at different mass scales motivate the study of a velocity-
dependent cross section of interaction.
Velocity-dependent SIDM models with gravothermally induced core-collapse may also
be able to account for the observed diversity of rotation curves of MW satellites [1, 75, 78, 79].
Recent observations indicate that the the densities of both satellite dwarfs [75] and isolated
halos [64, 67] are varied. Velocity-dependent SIDM models with sufficiently large interacting
cross sections at low relative velocities can induce gravothermal core-collapse in ultra-faint
dwarfs while preserving core formation in classical mass halos. Core-collapse timescales vary
by halo concentration and can be impacted by tidal effects [80, 116–118]. As a result, SIDM
models with large cross sections that drive core collapse at low masses produce diverse DM
density profiles ranging from cored to steeply cusped.
Previous works use parametric models of gravothermal collapse [1, 119, 120] or ide-
alized simulations to predict core-collapse times of SIDM halos with various cross sections
[80, 82, 121]. Additionally, various velocity-dependent SIDM models have been studied in
cosmological simulations of MW satellites [78, 90, 97–100]. However, this work compares
core-collapse timescales from a statistical sample of isolated halos with varied merger histo-
ries from a zoom-in simulation and contextualize our results with predictions from analytic
calculations. We present a sample of halos from Ms.Marvel DMO, an SIDM cosmological
volume simulation with a velocity-dependent cross section and a Yukawa potential [42, 122] in
the classical regime. We contextualize our findings using results from the Storm simulations,
a suite of matching CDM simulations run with the same initial conditions as the Ms.Marvel
box. These runs are a combination of dark-matter-only (DMO) simulations and simulations
run with baryonic components.
The focus of this paper is to test core-collapse timescales of SIDM halos with a velocity-
dependent interacting cross section.
[120] validate the parametric model in cosmological
simulations of massive (1012−13M⊙) host halos and their surrounding environment, finding
predictions to be within an agreement of 10% −50% for most (sub)halos.
Results from
[90, 100] further test the accuracy of the parametric model by analytically calculating the
gravothermal evolution of SIDM (sub)halos using matched CDM counterparts in cosmologi-
cal zoom-in simulations of host halos with masses of 1011, 1012, 1013, and 1014M⊙and their
satellite populations. They find that the predictions accurately model gravothermal evolution
through core-collapse. This work will test analytic predictions from the parametric model
against cosmological simulations of low-mass, dwarf halos in isolated field environments.
– 3 –

The paper is outlined as follows; in Section 2 we describe the simulations including
our implementation of relevant baryonic physics and a velocity-dependent SIDM model. We
show our results in Section 3, provide a detailed discussion in Section 4, and give a brief
overview of our findings in Section 5.
2
Simulations and Methodology
This work studies the gravothermal evolution of SIDM halos with a velocity-dependent cross
section of interaction from the zoom-in cosmological simulation Ms.Marvel DMO. We con-
textualize our findings with results from corresponding CDM simulations, Storm CDM DMO
and Storm CDM+baryons, to serve as a benchmark comparison. These results focus on dif-
ferences in core formation timescales and the inner slope of the DM density profiles of dwarf
galaxies between the two DM models.
The Ms.Marvel simulation has the same initial cosmological conditions as the Storm
simulation from the ‘MARVEL-ous Dwarfs” suite [hereafter “Marvel”; 31, 56, 123–128], but
an alternative DM model. This suite consists of four cosmological zoom-in simulations with
a WMAP3 cosmology [129] where, rather than simulating individual galaxies, small volumes
with multiple dwarf galaxies and maximum halo masses of approximately 1011M⊙are sim-
ulated at high resolution. The high resolution of the simulations coupled with the isolated
environment make these ideal simulations for studying the evolution of dwarf galaxies in
relative isolation. We exclude dwarf halos identified as satellites in our sample, minimizing
the potential gravitational effects of host halos on our sample. However, the halos in our
sample have varied merger histories, including major and minor mergers or potential fly-by
interactions that may impact the morphology of halos. For additional details refer to Section
3.2. The simulations are run with the Nbody+SPH code ChaNGa [130] which utilizes the
hydrodynamic modules from GASOLINE2 [131, 132].
2.1
Halo identification and sample
The Amiga Halo Finder [AHF; 133] was applied to Ms.Marvel DMO, Storm CDM DMO and
Storm CDM+baryons to identify DM halos, subhalos, and the baryonic content within. AHF
utilizes a spherical top-hat collapse technique to calculate each halo’s virial radius and mass.
These simulations identify the virial radius as the radius at which the halo density is 200
times the critical density of the universe at a given redshift. Each halo’s virial mass (M200) is
calculated as the mass contained within the virial radius. We limit our sample of Ms.Marvel
DMO and Storm CDM DMO halos to halos with a minimum of 104 DM particles, enabling us
to spatially resolve the inner structure of CDM down to 0.33 kpc. For a detailed discussion on
resolution see Appendix C Resolved galaxies from Storm CDM+baryons contain a minimum
of 14 star particles and have resolved star formation histories (SFHs) which extend past 100
Myr. We consider a sample of 228 halos from the Ms.Marvel DMO simulation, 235 halos
from the Storm CDM DMO simulation, and 20 galaxies from the Storm CDM+baryons
simulation. We note that the Storm CDM+baryons contains on the order of 200 resolved
DM halos, however, many are completely dark and only 20 halos host galaxies with enough
star particles to be considered resolved. The selected halos do not include satellites.
2.2
Ms.Marvel DMO
Ms.Marvel DMO simulates a 253 Mpc3 volume and uses a DM particle mass of 8070 M⊙with
a gravitational force resolution of 65 pc [123]. Where 65 pc is half the spline kernel width.
– 4 –

This high resolution allows DM halos that range in halo mass from M200 ≈8 × 107M⊙and
contain a minimum of 104 DM particles such that their halo centers are well-resolved prior
to core-collapse. We show in Appendix C that this particle resolution is sufficient to resolve
CDM halos with a spatial resolution of 0.33 kpc in accordance with [134].
However, we
note that [82] find a minimum requirement of 105 DM particles to fully resolve core-collapse,
indicating that our SIDM halos in the late stages of gravothermal evolution may be subject
to resolution effects.
Here we describe the SIDM model and implementation for the DMO run of Ms.Marvel.
Our SIDM model is run with a velocity-dependent cross section with a transfer cross-section
for a Yukawa potential [42, 122] in the classical regime. We present a sample of high-resolution
simulated dwarf halos, in a full cosmological volume centered on isolated dwarf galaxies. The
velocity-dependence of our self-interaction cross section is implemented to allow a subset of
halos to undergo core-collapse within a Hubble time. The velocity-dependence of the cross
section is parameterized by a maximum interacting cross section divided by the mass of the
dark matter particle equal to σmax/mχ = 50 cm2/g at a given maximum circular velocity
vmax = 35 km/s. The cross section at a given maximum circular velocity is tuned such that
the effective cross section of interaction is on the order of 101 cm2/g for classical dwarfs
and 102 cm2/g for our lowest-mass ultra-faint dwarfs (UFDs). The implementation of SIDM
particle physics follows from previous work by [135] and [95]. See Cruz et al.(in prep) for
additional details on the SIDM model and it’s implementation.
The transfer cross section of SIDM particles in our simulations is given by the following
piecewise function from [135]:
σT =







4π
m2
ϕ βln(1 + β−1)
β ≤10−1
8π
m2
ϕ β2(1 + 1.5β1.65)−1
10−1 ≤β ≤103
π
m2
ϕ (lnβ + 1 −0.5ln−1β)2
β ≥103







(2.1)
where β ≡2αχmϕ/v2
relmχ, mχ is the DM mass, mϕ is the mass of the light-mediator, v is
the relative velocity between DM particles, and the coupling αχ is the DM analog of the fine
structure constant. We show the transfer cross section for our SIDM model implemented
in Ms.Marvel compared against various velocity-dependent models trained on MW-satellites
from [136] and SIDM with a constant cross section simulated in both a MW environment
[136] and isolation [93] in Figure 1. We show velocity-dependent models with solid lines and
models with constant cross sections with dashed lines. We compare the inner slope of the
DM density profiles of dwarf halos from the Ms.Marvel simulation against the SIDM models
from [136] and [93] in Figure 9.
The SIDM model that we implement in this simulation is a light mediator model with
elastic scattering. Simulation particle scattering is stochastic with the probability of particle
collision between two DM particles given as a function of relative velocity and time interval
at local density with cross section per unit mass of DM interaction:
P = ρσdmvrel∆t
(2.2)
The timestep is adjusted such that the collision probability meets the criterion of ≤.1 per
timestep, such that for characteristic conditions (the stages of gravothermal evolution prior
to the core-collapse phase) ρσdmσvel∆t ≤0.1, where σvel is the local velocity dispersion and
ρ is the local density of each particle. The velocity dispersion is indicative of the temperature
– 5 –

Figure 1. The effective cross section versus Vmax for Ms.Marvel (black), with comparisons from
[93] in pink and [136]; SigmaConstant10 (dark red), SigmaVel20 (red), SigmaVel60 (orange red),
and SigmaVel100 (orange). Velocity-dependent models are shown with solid lines and models with
constant cross sections are shown with dashed lines.
We include different models in this plot to
contextualize our comparison between the inner slopes of the DM density profiles of dwarf halos from
the Ms.Marvel simulation against halos from [136] and [93] in a later section.
of DM particles.
The scattering probability is calculated for each particle with its k = 32 nearest neigh-
bors with a spline kernel at every time-step. To avoid multiple simultaneous scattering events
the probability of a particle collision between two DM particles is set to be much smaller
than once per time step. We then solve Equation 2.2 to set ∆t for the simulation. When DM
particle collisions occur, the scattering is simulated by a random reorientation in velocity
in the center-of-mass frame of the collision, with conserved energy and momentum. The
particle’s new momentum direction is then randomly assigned. As a result, SIDM halos form
isotropic central cores.
Modeling DM halos in the advanced stages of core-collapse presents many unique chal-
lenges to N-body simulations [82–84, 137–139].
For instance, [121] find that the central
density of core-collapsed halos increases by at least a factor of 5, necessitating a prohibitively
small time-step size. In the case where time-steps are too large it is possible for particles to
undergo multiple scatterings in a single time-step, leading to errors in energy conservation
[84, 140, 141]. Though [142] show that these errors in energy conservation can be mitigated
by the implementation of an algorithm that explicitly handles multiple scatterings. These
issues are most prominent in collapsed halos where extremely high central densities induced
– 6 –

by the gravothermal catastrophe increase the rate of scattering events. However, [139] find
that using time-steps which are time symmetric can reduce errors in energy conservation. In
this work we do not perform special treatment in core-collapsing halos due to the low number
of dwarfs that reach core-collapse. However, we note that, as a result, the central densities
reached by core-collapsing halos should be treated as a lower limit.
Other simulation parameters such as the gravitational softening length and mass res-
olution of the DM particle can affect core-collapse timescales. Accurately simulating core-
collapse requires high particle resolution as shown by [82] which find that collapse times
are subject to resolution effects in halos with fewer than 105 DM particles. They find that
affected halos have large variations in their collapse times that are slightly biased towards
longer core-collapse timescales. Similarly, [83] find variations in the collapse times of simu-
lated SIDM halos on the order of 10% in halos containing as many as 106 particles. [83] also
find that adaptive gravitational softening artificially accelerates the gravothermal evolution
by cooling the SIDM halo. [139] suggest that these errors in energy conservation arise from
gravitational softening lengths which are too small. They find that, if the softening length
lies within a reasonable range, halo evolution is insensitive to this simulation parameter. The
gravitational softening length used in this work lies above the minimum recommended thresh-
old in [134], indicating that halo evolution should be largely insensitive to this parameter in
the Ms.Marvel simulations.
2.3
Storm CDM DMO
To compare to predictions from CDM, we include a sample from a DMO run of Storm.
These simulations have DM particle masses of 8070 M⊙, and a force resolution of 65 pc. As
before, this high resolution allows halos in the range of M200 ≈8 × 107M⊙to 1011M⊙to be
considered resolved down to 0.33 kpc.
2.4
Storm CDM+baryons
To explore feedback-driven core-formation we include a sample of galaxies from a baryonic
run of the Storm CDM simulation from the Marvel suite.
Storm CDM+baryons is run
with the same initial DM conditions as Storm DMO, but includes baryonic particles and
additional subgrid physics models for baryonic physics processes such as star formation and
stellar feedback. These simulations implement gas, initial star, and DM particle masses of
1410 M⊙, 420 M⊙, and 6650 M⊙, respectively, and have a force resolution of 60 pc. We
consider galaxies with M∗≳3 × 103M⊙to be resolved.
Storm CDM+baryons implements superbubble feedback [143] treatment for type II
SNe, type Ia SNe, and stellar wind. At the time of the supernova, mass, metals and energy
are directly injected into surrounding gas particles. In the subsequent time-steps, subgrid
processes for thermal conduction and evaporation regulate the quantity of SN heated gas.
To treat superbubbles with initial sizes that lie below the gas particle mass resolution of our
simulations, we adopt a two-phase treatment of gas particles, which includes a hot phase and
a cold phase. This two-phase treatment allows thermal conduction to take place between
the hot and cold phases of SNe heated gas particles until the hot phase is no longer very hot
(∼105K)
We implement a stochastic star formation recipe with a star formation efficiency which
is dependent on the local non-equilibrium abundance of molecular hydrogen along with gas
cooling from [144]. Star formation takes place in particles that are sufficiently cold (T <
103K) and dense (n > 0.1 amu cm−3) though stars typically form above 100 amu cm−3
– 7 –

because of the H2 requirement. The probability of a star particle forming within a time ∆t
is given by:
p = mgas
mstar
(1 −e−c∗
0XH2∆t/tform)
(2.3)
where XH2 is the mass fraction of Hydrogen in the form of H2. In the equation above mgas
is the mass of the gas particle, mstar is the initial mass of the star particle that forms, and
tform is the local dynamical time. The star formation efficiency parameter (c∗
0) is a tunable
parameter set to 0.1 such that star formation follows the normalization of the Kennicutt-
Schmidt relation [145]. Star particles represent a population of stars born with a [146] initial
mass function.
3
Results
We organize this section as follows. In Section 3.1 we measure the inner density slopes of
halos from all three of our simulations (Ms.Marvel SIDM DMO, Storm CDM DMO, Storm
CDM+baryons) at redshift zero, then trace both the central densities and inner density slopes
of these halos through time to study core formation. We isolate a sample of core-collapsed
SIDM halos from Ms.Marvel DMO in Section 3.2, and identify a threshold for core-collapse in
Section 3.3. We compare core-collapse timescales with predictions from a parametric model
of gravothermal evolution [1] in Section 3.4.
3.1
Core formation in SIDM and CDM simulations
As discussed in the introduction, previous works have found that core-formation in ΛCDM
can be achieved through the inclusion of strong baryonic feedback, while SIDM halos naturally
produce central density cores. We directly compare core formation between SIDM and CDM
simulations with our Ms.Marvel DMO and Storm CDM+baryons halos in Figure 2, which
plots inner density slope against halo mass. We include halos from our Storm CDM DMO
simulations, whose unaltered DM density profiles serve as a baseline comparison. Ms.Marvel
DMO halos are represented by circles colored by their z = 0 central density, while Storm
CDM DMO and Storm CDM+baryons halos are marked by empty squares and purple squares
respectively. Coloring SIDM halos by their central density illustrates the relationship between
central density and the slope of the DM density profile at the center of each halo. Central
density is calculated as the average density contained within a 0.33 kpc radius from the
center of the halo. We find that above halo masses of ∼1010M⊙, both DM self-interactions
in SIDM halos and baryonic feedback in CDM halos produce central density cores. At lower
halo masses, only SIDM halos can form cores.
We measure inner density slope at 0.33 kpc (∼5× the softening length) by applying a
linear fit in log-log space to the DM density profile of the halo calculated through pynbody
[147] between 0.26 and 0.39 kpc.
1 We chose this radius because it is the smallest radius
where the DM density profile of the halo remains spatially resolved. We note that we measure
the slope of the DM density profile outside of the core radius for all but the most massive
halos in our sample, however, as we show in figure 2 we are still able to differentiate between
core-forming SIDM halos and core-collapsing SIDM halos at this radius. The DM density
profiles are calculated from the mass profiles generated by Tangos, a system that creates
1Measuring at a fixed radius means that the inner density slope is measured at larger distances (with
respect to the virial radius) as mass decreases. As a result, in Figure 2 the slopes of the density profiles
steepen with decreasing halo mass.
– 8 –

Figure 2. Central inner density slope (α) vs DM halo mass colored by central density. Colored
circles, empty squares, and purple squares represent halos from the Ms.Marvel DMO, Storm CDM
DMO, and Storm CDM+baryons simulations respectively. Grey points represent observed slopes in
dwarf galaxies from [149] (square), [150] (up triangle), [61] (down triangle), and [151] (diamond).
The inner density slope of a smoothed DM density profile is measured between 0.26 and 0.39 kpc in
each halo. Ms.Marvel halos are colored by corresponding central density, calculated as the averaged
density within a radius of 0.33 kpc.
and organizes databases of galaxy and halo properties in simulations [148]. We find that, for
SIDM halos in particular, this practice best preserves the high central densities of DM at the
innermost radii. Additionally, compared to a differential measurement of the density profile,
using enclosed mass at each radial bin to calculate the average density yields less noise.
The differences in the inner density slopes of low-mass (Mhalo < 1010M⊙) SIDM and
CDM halos results from how cores are formed differently between these two models of DM.
Previous work by [56] studying the Storm CDM+baryons simulations, shows that in ΛCDM
cores are formed and sustained through repeated feedback events. As a result, in low-mass
halos, which have fewer stars and less extended star formation histories (SFHs), baryonic
feedback is insufficient to convert cusps into cores. Both [56] and [63] find that the slopes
of UFDs, which are defined by [63] as galaxies with M∗/Mhalo ≤5 × 10−5M⊙, are indis-
tinguishable from DMO halos.
In this work, we define UFDs as halos less massive than
109M⊙.2
Figure 2 shows that as halo mass decreases, the inner density slopes of Storm
CDM+baryons halos become steeper, converging to the NFW profile predicted by ΛCDM
DMO simulations. In the Storm CDM DMO run, halos remain cuspy at all halo masses,
2UFDs are typically defined as galaxies with M∗< 105M⊙[10, 152]. [56] find that, in the Storm simulation,
galaxies at the upper end of the UFD mass range are hosted by halos with M200 ≃109M⊙. These results are
in agreement with previous published stellar-mass-halo-mass relations [102, 153].
– 9 –

with inner density slopes ranging between α ∼−1.7 and −1, despite a wide range of central
densities. In contrast, Ms.Marvel DMO halos form cores through DM self-interactions. We
find that these Ms.Marvel DMO halos with Mhalo < 1010M⊙produce DM density profiles
that are significantly more cored relative to Storm CDM+baryons halos of the same mass.
Because SIDM halos with sufficiently small initial concentrations can have extremely long
core-collapse timescales, even with large interacting cross sections, we expect that velocity-
dependent SIDM models that naturally produce cores in the bright dwarf range will also
produce some cored halos at lower masses.
Although we find evidence for core formation across the entire mass range of Ms.Marvel
DMO halos, 9 of the Ms. Marvel DMO halos have steeper inner density slopes, α < −2.0, ex-
ceeding the steepest measured slope from our Storm CDM DMO counterparts. These steeply
cusped SIDM halos have increased central densities that in some cases exceed the central den-
sities of cusped Storm CDM DMO halos, which are over 10 times more massive. We find
that Ms.Marvel halos are only this steeply cusped at halo masses below Mhalo ≈109M⊙.
In Section 3.4 we show that halos more massive than Mhalo = 109M⊙have core-collapse
timescales that exceed a Hubble time and remain cored. These results indicate that both
the median inner density slope and the scatter in inner density slope as a function of halo
mass of Ms.Marvel DMO halos exhibit a strong mass dependence, which is expected given
the implementation of a velocity-dependent cross section in our SIDM model.
In Figure 2, we compare with observed central DM density slopes (shown in grey) from
[150], [61] , [151] , and [149]. The observed DM density profiles are calculated from rotation
curves assembled using gas tracers [151], stellar kinematics [149], or a mix of baryonic com-
ponents [61, 150]. [151] measure the slope of the density profile between 300-800 pc, while
[150] and [61] measure slopes between 0.1-0.2 kpc. [150] and [61] calculate the dark matter
density profile from measurements of the rotation curve using the Poisson equation under the
assumption of a spherical mass distribution. They trace the motion of the gas component
and use the Gauses-Hermite polynomial to model the velocity field. The error bar in the rota-
tion velocities indicates the dispersion of individual velocity values found along a tilted ring.
[151] extracts rotation curves using DiskFit to model the fields produced from the Palomar
Cosmic Web Imager data, the error to the fit is represented by errorbars. For dwarf galaxies
with resolved stellar kinematics and well behaved HI gas rotation curves, [149] jointly model
the stellar and gaseous kinematics. They use the HI integrated intensity map and a discrete
set of line-of-sight velocity measurements from 180 member giant branch stars to calculate
the circular velocity of WLM. [150] and [149] study a set of isolated field dwarfs with lit-
tle to no gravitational interactions with other galaxies. Both data sets from [151] and [61]
include dwarf galaxies in a range of environments, however we exclude known satellites for
an apples-to-apples comparison between observations and the isolated field dwarfs from the
Ms.Marvel DMO and Storm CDM DMO simulations. SIDM satellites are also subject to host
halo effects such as tidal and ram-pressure stripping, which can impact their evolution [154].
For example, tidal interactions have been shown to disrupt the gravothermal evolution of
simulated SIDM satellites [80, 116–118]. However, [76] and [80] find that tidally stripped
SIDM halos can also have accelerated core-collapse timescales. In the ΛCDM paradigm tidal
stripping has been shown to lower the central DM densities, particularly in cored satellites
[21, 23].
The substantial differences in the predicted slopes of the DM density profiles at halo
centers of classical dwarf galaxy mass halos (109M⊙−1010M⊙) could be used to discriminate
between DM models observationally. Of the 4 lowest-mass observed dwarfs (IC 1613 [61],
– 10 –

Figure 3. Central inner density slope traced through time for Ms.Marvel DMO halos. Inner density
slope of a smoothed DM density profile is measured between 0.26 and 0.39 kpc in each halo. Each
solid line represents one halo, and lines are colored by halo central density at redshift zero. Halos are
separated into different panels by halo mass measured at redshift zero, decreasing from left to right
and from top to bottom. The black line represents the average slope traced through time for the
halos in each mass bin. Magenta lines represent slopes traced through time for Storm CDM+baryons
halos. Inner density slopes are measured using the same methodology as in Figure 2.
CVnIdwA [61], DDO 216 [61], and NGC 949 [151]), two are distinctly cuspy while the others
are more cored, with one positive core slope measurement. Strong, repeated bursts of stellar
feedback are required to form cores in CDM halos [56, 57], as a result, simulations predict
that CDM halos in this mass range should have cuspy inner DM density profiles. In other
words, cored low-mass halos are incompatible with current predictions from ΛCDM simula-
tions. In contrast, we find that the slopes of Ms.Marvel DMO halos can fall within a range
of values, from cored to steeply cusped. However, observed isolated dwarfs from [150], [61] ,
[151] , and [149] do not prefer either DM model shown in this work.
By measuring the inner density slopes of low-mass dwarfs discovered in new and up-
coming surveys or finding ways to decrease the uncertainty of this measurement, we have the
potential to rule out or place constraints on some DM models.
3.2
Tracing inner density slope and central density through time
Tracing inner density slope and central density over time enables us to study the formation of
cores in Ms.Marvel DMO halos and compare their evolution with their Storm CDM+baryons
counterparts. Through this process, we can visually identify core-formation and potential
core-collapse in the Ms.Marvel DMO run. We trace the inner density slopes of each Ms.Marvel
DMO and Storm CDM+baryons halo in Figure 3 while Figure 5 traces the growth in central
density between 2.26 and 13.78 Gyr, normalized by each halo’s initial central density for each
matched run. In Figures 4 and 6 we trace properties from the Storm CDM DMO simulation
– 11 –

Figure 4. Central inner density slope traced through time for Storm CDM DMO halos. inner density
slope of a smoothed DM density profile is measured between 0.26 and 0.39 kpc in each halo. Each
solid line represents one halo, and lines are colored by central density at redshift zero. Halos are
separated into different panels by halo mass measured at redshift zero, decreasing from left to right
and from top to bottom. The black line represents the average slope traced through time for the halos
in each mas bin. Magenta lines represent slopes traced through time for Storm CDM+baryons halos.
Inner density slopes are measured using the same methodology as in Figure 2.
to serve as a benchmark comparison. In the following section, we show that SIDM halos form
central density cores at early times, CDM halos with baryonic feedback form cores in higher
mass dwarfs at relatively later times, and CDM DMO halos maintain cuspy, NFW profiles
throughout their lifetimes.
Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6 are arranged as follows; each figure contains six separate panels
that are divided into different mass bins, ordered from high to low mass, going from left to
right and top to bottom. Each solid line represents the smoothed profile of an individual
halo and is colored by its central density at redshift zero. The bluer lines correspond to
decreased densities at redshift zero. The central density at redshift zero is calculated using the
same methodology described in Section 3.1. The black line represents the average evolution
track for halos in the corresponding mass bin. Plots are smoothed using a low pass infinite
impulse response (IIR) filter, described by a differential equation which relies on coefficients
to reject high frequencies and pass low frequencies, reducing signal noise. We design a low
pass filter using the irfilter function from scipy.signal and apply it to the data set with the
scipy.signal.filtfilt function.3
While tracing halo properties through time, we find several examples of halos with inner
density slopes or central densities that temporarily fluctuate, typically for a few Gyr or less.
For example, halo 16 from the Ms.Marvel DMO simulation has a inner density slope of around
3See https://github.com/scipy/scipy/blob/v1.16.1/scipy/signal for more details
– 12 –

-0.5 for most cosmic time, but between 7.5 and 12 Gyr the slope dips to nearly −2.0. After
examining the merger trees from each halo with large fluctuations in either inner density
slope or central density, we find that each of these instances coincided with a merger event.
Halos with disrupted inner density slopes also show large deviations in central density at the
same time-step. We conclude that mergers can temporarily alter the DM density profiles of
DM halos [155–157] for all three simulations; Ms.Marvel SIDM DMO, Storm CDM DMO,
and Storm CDM+baryons. The effects of these mergers typically do not exceed 2 Gyr and
can significantly disrupt the centers of DM halos during this time.
3.2.1
Inner density slopes
Separating our sample into different mass bins reveals that the evolution of inner density slope
is mass-dependent in Ms.Marvel DMO as shown in Figure 3. We find that all Ms.Marvel
DMO halos, excluding those in the lowest mass bin (Mhalo < 108M⊙), show signs of core-
formation with central density slopes shallower than a cuspy NFW profile. However, only the
most massive Ms.Marvel DMO halos form true cores, while halos less massive than 109M⊙
have cuspier central profiles on average. We define resolved cores and central density cores
with core radii that are greater than the spatial resolution used in this work. We measure the
core radius of a halo by fitting the DM density profile with a core-Einasto profile [63]. We find
that Ms.Marvel halos at higher masses are always cored, as far back as we trace halo proper-
ties through time. These results indicate that the cores of larger dwarfs (Mhalo > 109M⊙) are
fully formed within the first 2.26 Gyr of the simulation. Figure 3 indicates that while cores
form at early times at all halo masses, the average inner density slope reached by redshift
zero in Ms.Marvel DMO halos decreases with mass.
We note that by measuring at a constant radius of 0.33 kpc we measure the inner density
slope of lower mass halos at significantly larger radii relative to their virial radii. For halos
with masses less than 109M⊙we are likely measuring the inner density slope well outside of
the core radius and as a result, find that inner density slopes become steeper with decreasing
halo mass. However, we find evidence that most of these halos are likely still core forming
by comparing their inner density slopes with the unaltered NFW profiles of Storm CDM
DMO halos in Figure 4. We show that relative to Storm CDM DMO halos, Ms.Marvel SIDM
halos are significantly more cored at these lower masses, excepting the cases where the halo
is undergoing gravothermal core-collapse which we discuss further in Section 3.3.
We show in Figure 4 that at all halo masses Storm CDM DMO halos maintain cuspy
central profiles throughout their lifetimes that, on average, have inner density slopes between
−1.0 and −1.7. Slopes at the shallower end of this range match predictions from the NFW
profile, however, we also find that a significant population of CDM DMO halos have slopes
that are steeper.
We find that, on average, as halo mass decreases inner slopes become
steeper. At lower halo masses the fixed radius of 0.33 kpc we use to measure slope becomes a
larger fraction of the scale radius, where the slope of an NFW halo becomes −2. As a result
we would expect halos at lower masses to have slopes that are steeper than −1.
We note that even in the highest mass range we identify halos with inner density slopes
steeper than −1.5. Previous works indicate that the NFW profile may underestimate the
density of dark matter at the centers of halos [5, 158, 159]. However, N-body simulations find
a wide range of slopes for the central density cusps of CDM halos, some of which are shallower
than predictions from the NFW profile [160–162]. Major mergers [163, 164] and rapid mass
accretion [165] have been shown to transition steeper cusps into cores. Additionally, [166]
and [167] find that the overall mass accretion history of the halo is a good predictor of the
– 13 –

slope of the DM density profile.
We trace inner density slopes of Storm CDM+baryons halos through time (magenta
lines) in both Figures 3 and 4 to compare core formation timescales in the Ms.Marvel simula-
tions with results from our baryonic CDM Storm simulation. We find that relative to SIDM
halos, Storm+baryons halos form cores at later times, only after halos have been subject to
sufficient repeated rounds of stellar feedback. In accordance with previous results from [56],
core-formation is mass-dependent in CDM halos, with only the most massive dwarfs forming
large central density cores. In several of the lowest-mass halos in our sample (∼109M⊙)
the inner density slopes remain cuspy throughout their lifetimes because the limited stellar
feedback is insufficient to form central DM density cores. At these halo masses, we find that
the slope of the inner density profile is indistinguishable from our CDM DMO run of Storm.
3.2.2
Central densities
By tracing the growth in central density over time for Ms.Marvel halos we show that the
evolution of central density tracks inner density slope and, more broadly, core-formation. In
Figure 5, the highest-mass and most cored Ms.Marvel DMO halos have large central densities
at early times that quickly drop to values a fraction of their original value. Most cuspy halos
(α < −1.0), typically with masses below 5 × 108M⊙, have nearly constant central densities
throughout their lifetimes. Results from Figure 3 indicate that cores of the more massive
Ms.Marvel halos (Mhalo > 109M⊙) with the longest core-formation timescales, have well-
developed cores by 2.26 Gyr. It is possible that the central densities of halos with lower
masses, which typically form cores faster than halos at higher masses, are relatively constant
because they have fully formed core at 2.26 Gyr. These results reveal that the evolution of
central density as well as inner density slope is mass-dependent in Ms.Marvel DMO.
We note that the mass-dependence of central density may also be impacted by our
choice to measure both the central densities and the inner density slopes of each halo at a
fixed radius, regardless of halo mass. When measuring the sizes of cores in these low-mass
Ms.Marvel DMO halos, we find that only the most massive halos in our sample have core
radii that are larger than the fixed radius where we measure density slopes. Because the core
radii of lower-mass halos are smaller than radius of measurement, at these mass scales we
measure the slope of the profile outside of the central DM density core. As DM halos form
cores, DM particles are pushed out of the inner parts of the halo to larger radii, increasing the
density of DM outside of the core. This effect may wash out central density measurements
taken far enough outside of the central DM density core. By measuring the central density
and the slope of the density profile of lower mass halos (Mhalo < 109M⊙) at smaller radii
we could trace their evolution within the core radius, which would potentially reduce mass-
dependence.
We find that the evolution of central density closely follows inner density slope for
CDM halos from Storm CDM DMO and Storm CDM+baryons as well as SIDM halos from
Ms.Marvel. The Storm CDM DMO halos shown in Figure 6 are centrally dense at all times,
with very few halos that experience a significant long-term increase or decrease in central
density. Similarly to low-mass Ms.Marvel DMO halos (Mhalo < 109M⊙), the average central
density for Storm CDM DMO halos is nearly constant, with a slight increase over time (likely
a result of fast accretion halo growth dominated by major mergers [168, 169]), independent
of halo mass. The baryonic CDM halos from our Storm+baryons simulation colored in dark
blue for both Figures 5 and 6 decrease in central density over time in the highest mass bin
and show a range of behavior at lower masses. The lowest-mass Storm+baryons halo has a
– 14 –

Figure 5. Average central density measured within 0.35 kpc traced through time for Ms.Marvel
DMO halos. Central density is normalized by dividing by the initial central density (ρ0) of each
halo. Each solid line represents one smoothed halo profile, and lines are colored by central density
at redshift zero. Halos are separated into different panels by halo mass with mass decreasing from
left to right and from the top to bottom rows. The black line represents the average densities traced
through time for the halos in each panel. Magenta lines represent central densities traced through
time for Storm CDM+baryons halos. Central densities are calculated by taking the average central
density contained within 0.35 kpc of the halo center normalized by initial central density.
central density that remain largely constant over time, mirroring the behavior of Storm DMO
halos. We note that the initial growth in central density and subsequent fluctuations in are
caused by halo mergers that take place at early times. Between halo masses of 109−10M⊙
the more massive baryonic CDM halos have decreasing central densities over time, closely
following the behavior of core-forming SIDM halos from the Ms.Marvel simulation.
3.3
Core-collapsed Ms.Marvel DMO halos
Core-collapsed halos are characterized by an initial core-forming phase, and later undergo
core-collapse. The core-formation and core-collapse timescales are then dependent on the
quantity of SIDM self-scattering events. Increasing the size of the cross section leads to more
frequent scattering events, which has been shown in previous work to cause SIDM halos to
collapse at earlier times [121]. We analyze the gravothermal evolution of SIDM halos in the
Ms.Marvel simulation by tracking the distribution of DM at the center of collapsing halos
over time.
In Figures 3 and 5, we identify 13 halos with divergent behavior. This subset of halos is
characterized by density profiles that grow cuspier at late times, while the average Ms.Marvel
DMO halo grows more cored (at higher masses Mhalo > 109M⊙) or maintains a constant
central density (at lower masses Mhalo < 109M⊙). In addition to having steeper central
slopes, these halos are also more centrally dense at late times. Seven halos have particularly
– 15 –

Figure 6. Average central density measured within 0.35 kpc traced through time for Storm CDM
DMO halos. Central density is normalized by dividing by the initial central density (ρ0) of each
halo. Each solid line represents one smoothed halo profile, and lines are colored by central density
at redshift zero. Halos are separated into different panels by halo mass with mass decreasing from
left to right and from the top to bottom rows. The black line represents the average densities traced
through time for the halos in each panel. Magenta lines represent central densities traced through
time for Storm CDM+baryons halos. Central densities are calculated by taking the average central
density contained within 0.35 kpc of the halo center normalized by initial central density.
high central densities, exceeding 5×107M⊙kpc−3, which is approximately twice the average
central density of our Ms.Marvel DMO halos. These highly centrally dense halos have masses
≲109 M⊙and display steadily decreasing inner density slopes for the majority of their
lifetimes. In some cases, inner density slopes reach values as low as −2.5 which is substantially
lower than −1.9, the steepest slope identified in our sample of Storm CDM DMO halos. The
steepening of the density slopes of Ms.Marvel DMO halos could result from core-collapse.
We caution, however, that the resolution limits of the simulations do not permit us to fully
resolve core-formation in the mass range of the affected halos. We explore this further in
Figure 7, which isolates a subset of potentially core-collapsed halos.
In the following section, we define our sample of core-collapsed halos as having inner
density slopes that are more negative than −2.0 at z = 0.
We track the gravothermal
evolution of these Ms.Marvel DMO halos through time in Figure 7 to better illustrate how
DM behaves at the centers of halos during core-collapse, and measure core-collapse timescales.
The left panel of Figure 7 traces the inner density slopes of 9 core-collapsed halos over time,
with each halo colored by its maximum circular velocity. We define our core-collapsed sample
as halos with slopes which are more negative than −2.0 at redshift zero. We adopt this
threshold because it is just outside the range of inner density slope values we identified in
our sample of Storm CDM DMO halos. We further define a core-collapse time, Tc, where
the inner density slope of the halo first drops below a threshold of −2.0, illustrated by the
– 16 –

Figure 7. Left panel: Inner density slope measured at 0.33 kpc traced through time [Gyr] for our
sample of core-collapsed Ms.Marvel DMO halos. Each solid line represents one halo, and lines are
colored by maximum circular velocity with larger Vmax appearing bluer and lower values appearing
pinker. Vertical dashed lines intersect with inner slopes at the time when the halo’s inner density
slope first reaches −2.0 and the halo enters the initial stages of core-collapse. The −2.0 threshold
of inner density slope is shown by the horizontal gray line. Middle panel: average central density
enclosed within 0.35 kpc for core-collapsed halos traced through time. Central density is normalized
by dividing by initial central density. Right panel: Mass enclosed within 0.35 kpc for core-collapsed
halos traced through time.
vertical dotted lines. We use this collapse time to mark when the SIDM halo enters the initial
stages of core-collapse, and is not yet fully core-collapsed. This threshold marks the point
when an SIDM halo first becomes more steeply sloped than simulated halos from Storm
CDM DMO. In simulations with fully resolved core-collapse, the inner density slope of a
fully core-collapsed halo will become significantly steeper than this threshold in both isolated
gravothermal simulations [69–74, 77–82, 170] and cosmological simulations [74–76, 83, 85,
94, 170]. We then test how well our measured collapse time compares to predictions from
analytic models.
The middle and right-hand panels in Figure 7 measure the amount of DM contained
within the halo center over time using different properties for direct comparison. The middle
panel traces a normalized central density using the same methodology as in Figure 5 and
the right panel traces the total mass contained within 0.35 kpc. Comparing the middle and
right-hand panels to the evolution of the inner density slope in the left panel clearly shows
how the slope reacts to increases in the density/mass of DM located at the halo center. As
expected, we find that the inner density slope is inversely related to the central density, where
the sharpest decrease in the density slope corresponds to the highest rate of growth in central
density.
We find that most core-collapsed halos have fully formed cores by 2.5 Gyr, evidenced
by their lowered central densities and shallower inner density slopes. Core-collapse occurs
at a variety of times for Ms.Marvel DMO halos, with halos entering the initial stages of
core-collapse as early as ∼6 Gyr and some not entering the core-collapse phase until nearly
the end of the simulation. Additionally, we find that both the central density and enclosed
mass are good tracers of core-collapse. Specifically, an increase in either of these quantities
can indicate core-collapse.
– 17 –

Figure 8.
Left side: Predicted core-formation timescales (defined as τ = 0.15) plotted against
halo mass for Ms.Marvel DMO halos.
Blue squares mark the time when the inner density slope
of a Ms.Marvel DMO halo first drops below −2.0 while colored circles represent the predicted core-
formation timescales, calculated analytically from a parametric model [119]. Circles are colored by the
maximum circular velocity of each Ms.Marvel halo at redshift zero. Black lines link collapse timescales
from predictions and times measured directly from simulations for the same halo. The purple dashed
line marks the time of the last simulation snapshot at redshift zero. Right side: Predicted core-collapse
timescales calculated using Equation 3.1 (from [1, 74, 119]) plotted against halo mass, using the same
notation as the left side.
Three of the halos in the core-collapsed sample have a slight decrease in central density
and enclosed mass at late times. In Appendix B we show that this unexpected turndown
in DM density results from measuring central density too far outside the halo center. With
higher spatial resolution, it is possible to more confidently measure halo properties within
smaller radii. However, we show that the growth of the central density remains mostly stable
down to one gravitational softening length.
3.4
Parameterization of gravothermal evolution
Following [100], we analytically calculate the core-formation timescale, defined here as the
full time that the SIDM halo is core-forming, ending at the point where the halo begins to
undergo core-collapse, using a parametric model. The gravothermal evolution of each halo
is parameterized by τ ≡t/tcc where t is the formation time of each halo and tcc is the core-
collapse timescale [74]. Halos with τ < 0.15 are defined as “core-forming” and halos with
τ > 0.75 are “core-collapsed”. Halos that are core-forming have decreasing central densities
and halos in the core-collapse phase have central densities exceeding CDM halos [1, 171]. As
such, the core-formation timescale is calculated as the time it takes for the halo to reach the
point where τ = 0.75 in its gravothermal evolution. This gravothermal evolution is governed
by a set of normalized density parameters such that when the halo becomes fully collapsed
(τ = 1) the scale density grows to be approximately 10 times its initial value [1].
The formation time t for each halo in Ms.Marvel is computed using a universal halo mass-
formation time relation defined as when the NFW halo parameters ρs and rs first become
stable, estimated by its present day halo mass. See Section 3.1 of [119] for more details. To
analytically calculate the core-collapse timescales we use a parametric model [1, 119, 120],
which models the gravothermal evolution of SIDM halos from their initial NFW profile. In
– 18 –

this model the core-collapse timescale [74] is characterized by the following equation;
tcc = 150
C
1
(σeff/m)reffρeff
1
√4πGρeff
(3.1)
Where σeff is the effective cross section and C is a constant, calibrated to N-body simulations.
In this work, we adopt the same value of C = 0.75 used by [119]. We note that a larger
(smaller) value of C would shorten (lengthen) the core-collapse timescales calculated in this
work. We define the effective radius (reff), and the density at the effective radius of the halo
(ρeff) below.
reff = Rmax
2.1626,
ρeff =

Vmax
1.648 × reff
2
× G−1
(3.2)
In the case where the DM halo follows an NFW profile the effective density (radius) converges
to the scale density (radius), see [1] for more details. We calculate the effective cross section
following work from [137] where we assume that DM particles follow a Maxwell-Boltzmann
velocity distribution. The following equation assumes a differential cross section of
dσ
d cos θ to
evaluate the cross section
σeff =
1
512v8
eff
Z
dvd cos θ(
dσ
d cos θ)v7 sin2 θ exp(−v2
4v2
eff
)
(3.3)
where veff ≈0.64 Vmax (maximum circular velocity). The function integrates over the halo’s
characteristic velocity dispersion and scattering angle between DM particle collisions evalu-
ated form from 0 to π. For a given halo, we assume a Maxwellian distribution and integrate
the velocity term from zero to infinity. The relative velocity of DM particles is represented
by v and θ is the scattering angle in the center of mass frame. The differential cross section
of SIDM particles in our simulations is approximated by the following equation from [135]
dσ
dΩ≈σT
4π
β ≲1
(3.4)
To apply this differential cross seciton to the equation described in [1] we partially integrate
the solid angle derivative over dϕ, assuming azimuthal symmetry.
The parametric model predicts the gravothermal evolution of SIDM halos from the evo-
lution history of the circular velocities of matched CDM counterparts. The model assumes
that the mass accretion history of SIDM halos and CDM halos are similar. This assumption
is primarily violated in subhalos, which are excluded from the halo sample used in this anal-
ysis. In this work, we study a sample of extremely low-mass SIDM halos from a cosmological
simulation. Because of the stochastic nature of these simulations, particularly at such low
masses, we only identify matched CDM halos for a few of the halos in our core-collapsed
SIDM sample. As a result, we instead analytically calculate collapse timescales from the
Vmax and Rmax of our SIDM halos at the final time-step in the simulation at redshift zero.
In this case, the collapse time indicates how much additional evolution past redshift zero are
required for the halo to become fully core-collapsed. Because we use the analytic collapse
time to calculate the amount of time required for additional evolution we eliminate the un-
derlying assumption that the mass accretion histories of SIDM and CDM halos are similar.
However, this analysis is limited by the resolution of SIDM halos particularly at low
masses and in the late stages of evolution. As we noted earlier, many of our halos may expe-
rience artificially elongated collapse times as a result of limited halo resolution. Additionally,
– 19 –

it is extremely difficult to measure SIDM halos in the later stages of core-collapse. As a result
we note that our analytically calculated collapse times, particularly at the low-mass end, are
potentially biased towards longer collapse times.
Figure 8 validates our measurement of Tc measured from the inner density slopes of DM
halos. Here we directly compare the core-formation and core-collapse timescales predicted by
the parametric model [1, 100, 119, 120]. The left side of Figure 8 compares Tc with the pre-
dicted core-formation timescales. The right side of Figure 8 compares Tc with the analytically
predicted core-collapse timescale. The figure uses the following legend; blue squares mark Tc
for our sample of core-collapsed Ms.Marvel DMO halos and circles (diamonds) represent the
core-formation (collapse) timescales and are colored by maximum circular velocity. Black
lines link different timescales measured for the same halo. The dashed purple horizontal line
marks the last timestep of the simulation, equal to the age of the Universe.
Because the predicted core-collapse timescale is set such that it measures the amount
of additional time past redshift zero required for the halo to become fully core-collapsed it is
necessarily offset to longer timescales than the collapse timescale measured from inner den-
sity slope. We note that SIDM halos experience rapid gravothermal evolution after reaching
the end of the core-forming phase, and should collapse on short timescales. As a result, the
core-formation timescale can also be used to indicate the initialization of core-collapse in an
SIDM halo.
We find that core-formation and core-collapse timescales are mass-dependent, where
formation/collapse times increase with larger relative velocities between DM particles and
decreasing cross-section of interaction. The predicted timescales of Ms.Marvel halos with
masses greater than 5 × 108M⊙grow steadily with increasing halo mass. Below this thresh-
old, Ms.Marvel halos have a wide range of potential core-formation/collapse times. We note
that this behavior is specific to the scattering model used in this work and different cross sec-
tion models result in distinct patterns. However, at lower masses the gravothermal evolution
of the halo is greatly influenced by halo concentration accross all SIDM models. As a result,
for a halo to become core-collapsed within a Hubble time it must not only be low mass, but
also have a high enough concentration to increase the rate of self-scattering events.
The lowest mass Ms.Marvel halos have collapse timescales that range in several orders
of magnitude. This huge scatter in core-collapse time that increases with decreasing halo
mass may partially result from resolution effects [82, 83]. [82] found that for halos with fewer
than 105 particles the collapse rate has large variation due to the effects of large discreteness
noise. Additionally, they found that these outliers in the collapse rate are slightly biased to-
ward longer core-collapse timescales, which could partially account for the elongated collapse
rates predicted in some of our analytic calculation in the UFD mass range, where halos may
contain as few as 104 particles. As a result, in halos with masses below ∼8 × 108M⊙we
would expect analytically predicted collapse times to be biased toward longer timescales. We
note that the particle resolution effect is found to impact collapse times on an order of 10’s
of percent effect [82], indicating that some of the extremely long collapse times measured in
this work may suffer from additional resolution effects.
Nonetheless, in Figure 8 we find good agreement between the collapse time directly
measured from the inner density slopes of Ms.Marvel DMO halos Tc, and analytic calcula-
tions of core-formation and core-collapse. Despite only identifying 9 halos as core-collapsed
out of the 24 halos with core-formation timescales shorter than the length of the simulation,
we successfully find the halos with the shortest core-formation and core-collapse times. Each
core-collapsed halo has a predicted core-formation time smaller than 10.5 Gyr. In contrast
– 20 –

9 out of the 24 halos with fully formed cores have core-formation times exceeding 12 Gyr.
These halos require more than 13 Gyr of additional evolution past the end of the simulation
to become fully core-collapsed. Compared to the halos we identify as core collapsed, seven
are predicted to be fully collapsed within 2 Gyr of the last timestep, and all are predicted to
be fully collapsed within 6 Gyr. We conclude that we are able to successfully identify the 9
most deeply core-collapsed halos in our sample. The remaining 15 out of 24 halos are likely
at the onset of core-collapse, however, they are not yet collapsed enough to be detected.
We find that the analytic core-formation timescales generally have good agreement with
collapse times measured from the halo’s inner density slope. All halos have Tc that agree
within 4 Gyr of the analytic prediction for core-formation, with no apparent differences in
the degree of accuracy between lower and higher mass halos. Measured timescales appear to
favor times that are slightly longer than the core-formation timescale, with only three halos
(of the 9 that we identify as core-collapsed) having measured core-collapse times shorter than
the analytically predicted core-formation time. This means that we identify halos as core-
collapsed around or shortly after the halo has finished forming its core. These results indicate
that even in the initial phases of core-collapse, the inner DM density profiles of SIDM halos
become significantly cuspier.
Most of the core-collapsed halos are all extremely low-mass (Mhalo ≲2 × 108M⊙) with
central density cores that are too small to be fully resolved. We speculate that measuring the
inner density slope closer to the center of these lower mass halos could bring our results into
closer agreement. However, in this section we do not measure the density slopes inside of 0.33
kpc, the spatial resolution cut uniformly adopted in this work. In the Discussion section we
study the effects of measuring the slope of core-collapsed halos at different radii, including
measuring the density slope within three times the softening length (see Figure 10). For a
discussion of spatial resolution limits adopted in this work see Appendix C.
Previous work studying collapse timescales for SIDM halos [80, 82, 121] commonly uses
the increase or growth in central density as a metric to identify core-collapse timescales. In
Appendix A we compare our results from this section with a different method for identifying
halos in the core-collapse phase using measurements of the growth of central density of the
halo. We find that, for identifying halos that are in the core-collapse phase, central density
is a less accurate metric than inner density slope. For a more detailed discussion see Figure
12 in Appendix A and the discussion therein.
4
Discussion
In this paper we study the gravothermal evolution of isolated dwarf halos simulated with
SIDM by measuring the central densities and inner density slopes of halos from the Ms.Marvel
simulation. Here we contextualize our results by comparing our simulations with other works
and discussing the impact of measuring halo properties at different radii. We note that dif-
ferent papers favor a variety of methodologies for measuring density slope and both observers
and simulators frequently measure halo properties at different radii, complicating the com-
parison of our results with previous works. In the following section we discuss how differences
between simulations, such as SIDM model and environment, can impact the gravothermal
evolution of SIDM halos. We also measure halo properties across a range of radii, these re-
sults have important implications for how the definition of core-collapse changes, depending
on the radius of measurement.
– 21 –

4.1
A comparison to other SIDM simulations
In the following section we compare we compare our Ms.Marvel DMO halos with different
SIDM cross sections from [93] and [136]. In Section 2 we compare the cross sections from
this work with the cross sections from [136] and [93] directly (Figure 1), however, Figure 9
plots the inner density slopes of of SIDM halos from various models against their halo mass.
Blue points represent Ms.Marvel halos, where inner density slope is calculated using the
same method described in Figure 2. Grey markers represent the density slopes of observed
galaxies as described in Figure 2. Pink hexagons represent halos from [93] with a constant
cross section of interaction of σ = 2 cm2/g. They measure the DM density profile measured
at 500 pc for two distinct field dwarfs with masses of 1010M⊙and 5 × 1010M⊙. We find
that, for halos in this mass range, the cross section implemented by [93] is consistent with
the cross section adopted in this work. This is, perhaps, unsurprising considering that at the
effective cross section of our velocity-dependent SIDM model lies between 100 and 101 for
halos in this mass range.
The results presented from [136] are the average slopes of a sample of satellites of MW-
mass hosts from the TangoSIDM simulations with masses ranging from 109−9.5M⊙. [136]
measure the logarithmic density slope by taking a linear fit of the DM density profile between
1 −3 kpc. The different colors correspond to four unique SIDM models; SigmaConstant10
(dark red), SigmaVel20 (red), SigmaVel60 (dark orange), and SigmaVel100 (lighter orange).
SigmaConstant10 is a constant cross section of interaction σ = 10 cm2/g, while the velocity-
dependent models are characterized by the cross section reached at 10km/s such that, for
SigmaVel100 σT /mχ = 100 cm2/g. Similarly models reaching 60 and 20 cm2/g at 10 km/s
are called SigmaVel60 and SigmaVel20, respectively. Figure 1 plots the transfer cross sections
of out SIDM model and the models from [93] and [136] for a direct comparison. We show in
Figure 2 that our SIDM model allows us to match observations of central cores in isolated
field dwarf galaxies in the bright dwarf mass range (Mhalo = 1010−11M⊙). At lower masses,
a subset of SIDM halos undergo core-collapse, becoming extremely centrally dense to match
low-mass objects with high central densities [61, 151].
Similarly to the SIDM model studied in this work, [136] also simulate a light-mediator
model with a Yukawa potential. However, the differential cross section from the Ms.Marvel
simulations lies in the perturbative regime (where αχmχ/mϕ < 1), while the Transfer cross
section in this work considers non-perturbative corrections outside of the regime where the
Born approximation is valid.
The cross sections of the SIDM models implemented by [136] are lower than the velocity-
dependent interaction cross section implemented in Ms.Marvel, however, we find that Tan-
gosSIDM halos undergo gravothermal collapse at higher masses relative to Ms.Marvel DMO
halos. We expect that differences in environment may account for the accelerated collapse at
higher masses in the TangoSIDM simulations. TangoSIDM halos are satellites of a MW-mass
host while the largest halo simulated in Ms.Marvel is a Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) mass
halo. Additionally, we exclude satellites in our sample, meaning that all Ms.Marvel halos pre-
sented in this work exist in a relatively isolated environment. This speculation is supported
by [99, 172] who show that core-formation in SIDM halos is dependent on environment. [90]
find that the rate of core-collapse is also higher in subhalos relative to halos simulated in
isolation. Additionally, previous work shows that the gravothermal evolution of SIDM halos
can be accelerated or disrupted by tidal interactions [80, 116–118]. These results underscore
the importance of studying core-formation in SIDM across a range of environments.
– 22 –

Figure 9. Central inner density slope (α) vs DM halo mass for SIDM halos from the Ms.Marvel
DMO run (blue circles), [136] (colored diamonds), and [93] (pink pentagons). Open points are DMO
runs while filled points are baryonic runs. Grey points represent observed slopes in dwarf galaxies
from [149] (square), [150] (up triangle), [61] (down triangle), and [151] (diamond). Inner density slope
is calculated at 0.33 kpc from the DM density profile.
4.2
Tracing inner density slope at different radii
As discussed in the previous section, the DM density profiles of Storm CDM DMO, Storm
CDM+baryons, and Ms.Marvel DMO halos are not fully resolved at central radii below 0.33
kpc. This resolution limit severely restricts our ability to study the centers of the lowest-
mass halos in our sample. Both Figures 2 and 3 demonstrate that the inner density slopes
of Ms.Marvel DMO halos exhibit a strong mass dependence, where slope decreases with the
halo mass. We find that low-mass halos (Mhalo < 109M⊙) form cores with sizes well below
the resolution limits of the simulations. As a result, inner density slope measurements for all
halos below this mass threshold take the slope of the profile well outside the core radius.
These results indicate that fully resolving core-formation in UFD-mass halos requires
extremely high resolution, which would be difficult to achieve in cosmological simulations,
especially in simulations that incorporate baryonic processes. However, we can still obtain
information about the centers of these low-mass halos even without fully resolving their cores.
Our results show clear evidence of core-collapse in halos with halo masses below 2 × 109M⊙.
Of these nine, the halos with the highest central densities have inner density slopes approach-
ing −3, far below those predicted by CDM simulations as seen in Figure 2. These slopes also
deviate from average inner density slope values in their given halo mass bin. We conclude
that the process of core-collapse impacts the shape of the DM density profile out to much
larger radii than the core radius. Hence, profile shapes outside of the central DM density
– 23 –

Figure 10. Left side: inner density slope vs. Tc averaged for nine core-collapsed halos at different
radii ranging from one softening length at 65 pc (light blue) to 8 times the softening length at 520 pc
(red). The radius of measurement is colored using the same legend shown on the right-hand side for
both inner density slope and central density. Lines represent the average inner slope traced through
time at each radius for the entire sample of core-collapsed Ms.Marvel DMO halos with the shaded
region corresponding to one standard deviation. Tc is the time relative to core-collapse such that each
halo’s collapse time is defined as Tc = 0. Core-collapse time is calculated using the same methodology
as in Figure 7. Right side: Central density normalized by the density of the fully formed core vs.
Tc. Central densities are measured at the same radii and use the same legend and x-axis as in the
left-hand side.
core can still give us insight about the behavior of DM at halo centers.
To further test how the evolution of the density profiles of core-collapsed halos is im-
pacted by spatial resolution constraints, we measure inner density slope at different radii for
our sample of nine core-collapsed Ms.Marvel DMO halos. The left side of Figure 10 plots the
average density slope measured at different radii, marked by color, over time. We measure
inner density slopes at 7 different radii ranging from 65 pc (blue) to nearly 500 pc (red)
for core-collapsed Ms.Marvel DMO halos. Time is measured with respect to core-collapse
time, where core-collapse time is defined by inner density slope as in Figure 8 with the time
of core-collapse (Tc) set equal to zero. We define time prior to the onset of core-collapse
as negative while positive times represent the number of years after core-collapse. Shaded
regions represent one standard deviation from the mean.
We choose to study radii ranging from 65 pc to roughly 500 pc to represent a broad scale
of different spatial resolution limits across simulations and observational data. The smallest
limit we consider here is the gravitational softening length, while the largest radius is large
enough to be directly compared with observations. As shown in Appendix B, the growth
of central density in core-collapsed halos remains stable up to approximately the softening
length. As a result, we believe that while the regions we study are unresolved within 0.33
kpc in accordance with stringent resolution restrictions, we expect these trends to be largely
consistent at higher resolution. Furthermore, without extensive resolution tests trained on
SIDM halos it is unknown if SIDM simulations face the same resolution issues documented
in CDM.
We find that measuring the inner density slope closer to the halo center results in values
that are more cored. Additionally, we find that at all radii the slopes of Ms.Marvel DMO
– 24 –

halos are shallowest several Gyr before they begin to collapse. Within one softening length,
our subsample of Ms.Marvel DMO halos remain cored until they enter the initial stages of
core-collapse. In contrast, slopes measured outside of this radius steepen during the core-
forming phase before the halos begin undergoing collapse. The inner density slopes measured
at radii outside of three softening lengths (180 pc) converge below −2.0 within a couple of
Gyr after the onset of core-collapse. Inside of three times the softening length we find that
slopes remain shallower for more extended periods of time, potentially resulting from lowered
central densities in unresolved halo centers.
At radii outside of 400 pc we find that inner density slopes start growing shallower
approximately 1 Gyr after core-collapse. It is reasonable to guess that this behavior might
be related to the turndown effect that we identify in Figure 7 and discuss in Appendix B.
However, we show in Figure 7 that the inner slopes of these halos measured at 325 pc don’t
grow shallower as the central density decreases. This indicates that the slope of the DM
density profile evolves differently at radii inside and outside of the central DM density core.
We recommend measuring the slope of the DM density profile at the halo’s core radius. In
the case that the core radius lies within the resolution limits of the simulation we recommend
measuring the slope of the profile at the smallest possible resolved radius.
While our results indicate that the inner density slopes of core-collapsed SIDM halos
are cusped enough to be distinct from the inner density slopes of CDM halos at a variety
of radii, it is still difficult to observationally identify core-collapsed halos. This is largely
because UFDs are extremely low-mass systems, making it hard to resolve their central DM
density slopes. For instance, [173] find that UFDs can have half-light radii ranging from tens
of parsecs to several hundred parsecs for galaxies with M∗< 105M⊙in the Local Group. By
measuring the slope of the DM density profile at larger radii we may be able to probe the
inner slopes of DM halos at lower masses. We find that even though the measured density
slope of Ms.Marvel DMO halos in the initial stages of core-collapse depend on the radius
of measurement, our results converge outside of three times the softening length. This is in
agreement with previous tests that indicate a convergence radius of 2.8ϵ [174]. We note that
2.8ϵ is well tested for CDM, but we may be able to resolve lower masses in SIDM simulations
because SIDM scatter dominates over the spurious two-body gravational interactions. In
Appendix C we briefly discuss how resolution criteria trained on CDM simulations do not
account for SIDM self-scatterings and may not be applicable to SIDM simulations. As a
result, inner density slope remains a valid mechanism for identifying core-collapse out to 500
pc.
4.3
Tracing central density at different radii
We compare the effect of measuring inner density slope at different radii with central density
in the right side of Figure 10 by measuring central densities at different radii. Here we plot
the normalized density measured at different radii separated by color over time. Central
densities are normalized by dividing by the central density of the fully formed core for each
halo. We plot the mean of this value for the nine core-collapsing halos over time.
The right side of Figure 10 demonstrates that the central densities measured at different
radii diverge as the halo enters the core-collapse stage. When measuring central density at
radii exceeding 390 pc the average halo only grows to at most twice as centrally dense as its
initial central density. In contrast, measuring central density at 65 pc results in the central
density increasing by more than an order of magnitude at the late stage of core-collapse.
The changes in the growth of central density between different radii are most stark in the
– 25 –

Figure 11. Left side: the averaged density contained within 50% of a characteristic scale radius
at redshift zero for Ms.Marvel DMO halos (empty circles), Storm DMO halos (filled triangles), and
the baryonic run of Storm (filled squares). Each point is colored by the inner dark matter density
slope, measured using the same methodology as in Figure 2. The filled circles represent SIDM halos
that we identify as core-collapsed using the criteria from Figure 8. The grey shaded area represents
a “low resolution” region where for low-mass halos the 50% and 25% fractions of the scale radius
are smaller than the spatial resolution of the simulation (0.33 kpc). Right side: this figure uses the
same shared notation from the left-hand side but plots the central density averaged within 25% of
the characteristic scale radius.
more advanced stages of core-collapse, however, these differences are apparent even at the
initialization of core-collapse. Central density grows rapidly within the innermost regions of
the halo and grows at a slower rate in the outer regions of the halo.
The changes in the rate of growth in the central density of core-collapsed halos at
different radii has important implications for identifying core-collapsed halos observationally
and constraining core-collapse timescales. Firstly, these results indicate that it may be very
difficult to observationally distinguish collapsed SIDM halos from their cored counterparts
in the UFD mass range by their central densities. Secondly, when implementing a threshold
for collapse, it is important to consider at what radii halo properties are measured. We find
that central density, in particular, is extremely sensitive to radius compared to the slope
of the DM density profile. We conclude that while central density remains a more direct
indicator of core-collapse in well-resolved SIDM halos, measuring the inner density slope is
more accurate in lower resolution simulations and at larger radii of simulated halos.
4.4
Potential kinematic signatures of core-collapse
In Section 4.2, we discuss the viability of identifying core-collapsed halos observationally from
measurements of their central densities and the inner slopes of their dark matter density
profiles. However, stellar kinematics may also be used to potentially identify core-collapsing
SIDM halos. [175] find that in idealized simulations of a halo with M200 = 3×1010M⊙(where
M200 is the mass of a halo with a radius that is 200 times the critical density) both the half-
– 26 –

light radius and the mass-to-light ratios within the half-light radius were significantly altered
by core-collapse. They find that the half-light radius of core-collapsed halos could shrink down
to half their original radius, while the mass-to-light ratios increased by an order of magnitude.
We anticipate that hydrodynamic runs of the core-collapsing halos in our sample, which have
central densities that increase by an order of magnitude within ∼100 −200 pc of the halo
center, should experience a similarly detectable growth in mass-to-light ratio.
Figure 11
plots the averaged central density (ρave) contained within 50% and 25% of a characteristic
scale radius (rs) for each halo in the Ms.Marvel SIDM DMO, Storm CDM DMO, and Storm
CDM+baryon simulations. The characteristic scale radius for each halo is determined by
a best fit to the linear relationship between halo mass and the scale radius of CDM DMO
halos from the Storm simulations, fit with an NFW profile [12] in log-log space. We find that
for Storm DMO halos this relationship contains little scatter, making halo mass an excellent
predictor of the value of the scale radius for an unaltered NFW profile. We note that the
smallest characteristic scale radius in our sample is equal to 0.65 kpc and, as a result, the
measurements of the averaged central density for each halo at half the scale radius for all but
the lowest mass halos in our sample remain well-resolved. We highlight the regions of low
resolution with grey shaded areas. We caution that our results on the right panel measure
the central density of each halo within up to ≈0.16 kpc, and note that halos with masses
Mhalo ≲7 × 108M⊙lie within a region not considered fully resolved by our conservative
estimates. Therefore, the central densities of the lowest-mass halos in our sample should be
taken as a lower bound.
We find that core-collapsing SIDM halos, highlighted as the filled circles while the
core-forming SIDM halos are marked by empty circles, are more centrally dense than their
CDM and core-forming counterparts. Measuring at a smaller fraction of the scale radius
increases the difference between core-collapsing and core-forming SIDM halos, with all core-
collapsing halos having higher central densities than any other halo in our simulations. The
core-collapsed halos reach central densities within 25% of the scale radius that are up to
ten times higher than their CDM counterparts, which marks central density as a promising
indicator of core-collapse. However, it may be difficult to accurately measure central densities
within the radii considered here, which are typically on the order of one hundred to a few
hundred parsecs in halos less massive than Mhalo = 109M⊙. Interestingly, the highest-mass
SIDM halos appear more centrally dense than the highest-mass CDM halos from the baryonic
Storm run, though both have similar inner DM density slopes.
4.5
Tidal effects in SIDM subhalos
In this work, we analyze halos simulated in a low-density environment, excluding satellite
dwarfs from the study. We note that most observed dwarf galaxies, especially in the ultra-
faint mass range, are satellites in the Local Group. While an in depth study of the impact of
tidal effects on the gravothermal evolution of SIDM halos is beyond the scope of this work,
we provide a brief overview here.
Previous works show that SIDM can suppress the abundance of subhalos through en-
hanced tidal stripping and tidal disruption of cored halos and evaporation from subhalo–host
halo interactions [97, 102, 176]. High resolution cosmological simulations of MW-mass halos
and their environment find that SIDM suppresses the subhalo mass function by up to 50%
relative to CDM [90]. Similarly, for a cross section of σ/mχ = 2 cm2g−1, [102] find that 56%
of subhalos were disrupted and erased due to subhalo-host halo interactions. However, [177]
find that, for σ/mχ = 1 cm2g−1, the predicted substructure abundance of MW satellites is
– 27 –

very similar between SIDM and CDM. Surveys probing the abundance and structure of the
MWs satellite population will provide important constraints for the cross section of SIDM
[78, 90].
The interaction cross section of SIDM models may also be constrained by the density
profiles of dark matter halos. Velocity-dependent models with high interacting cross sections
that induce core-collapse at low masses predict a wide diversity of density profiles. These
SIDM models produce halos that may explain observations from the very low-concentration
ultra-diffuse galaxies [89, 141] to extremely concentrated substructures detected by gravi-
tational imaging [121, 137, 172]. [100] find that, for an SIDM model with strong velocity-
dependence, high mass SIDM subhalos are cored, while subhalos with Mhalo ≤109M⊙have
density profiles that range from extremely cored to very cuspy for core-collapsed objects.
Additionally, they find that cored SIDM halos exist in a much higher abundance in isolation
compared to satellites. Cored subhalos are more likely to become tidally disrupted [176],
but the decreased number of cored subhalos is also likely impacted by other factors. The
gravothermal evolution of SIDM subhalos has been shown to be accelerated by tidal strip-
ping [76, 77, 80]. Future hydrodynamic SIDM simulations will test whether these models are
capable of reproducing the tight scaling relations exhibited by dwarf galaxies in the Local
Group.
4.6
Halo mergers and substructure in SIDM halos
It is predicted that, even at lower masses, dark matter halos may contain additional sub-
structure in the form of even lower mass subhalos. We exclude all satellites from our analysis,
focusing on halos that are located in relative isolation and we note that subhalos of most of
our sample would lie below the resolution of the simulation and remain unresolved. As a re-
sult, we do not directly test how our results may be impacted by halo substructure, however,
we briefly discuss it here.
In Section 3.2 we find that in the 1-2 Gyr immediately following a merger event the
central densities and inner density slopes of SIDM halos can fluctuate significantly. In Figure
3 we found cases where the inner slopes of the DM density profile temporarily flattened and
at other times where the inner slope became steeper after a merger. Additionally, we find
evidence in Figure 8 that major mergers may delay the onset of core-collapse in SIDM halos.
These results imply that mergers can temporarily alter the DM density profiles of DM halos.
Recent work from [178] finds that the gravothermal evolution of SIDM halos is altered by
halo mergers, where halos with sustained mergers never undergo core-collapse. The impact
of halo mergers on the density profiles of halos may also be more pronounced in SIDM than
in CDM. [179] find that SIDM halos contain a higher portion of gravitationally unbound
particles and that it is easier to unbind particles from SIDM mergers due to the shallower
potentials of cored SIDM halos relative to cuspy CDM halos.
Recently, [180] found that dark subhalos can produce fluctuations to the gravitational
potential of the host halo resulting in dynamical heating of the central regions and a gradual
expansion over time. This effect is most pronounced in low-mass dwarf galaxies. These re-
sults assume that dark matter is a collisionless particle. With SIDM halos it is unclear how
much infalling dark halos would impact the central potential well of the host and it’s inter-
nal dark matter structure. There are two main differences that could significantly impact
this process in SIDM. The first is tidal disruption of subhalos: cored SIDM halos are more
susceptible to tidal disruption than their CDM counterparts [97, 102, 176]. If the subhalos
become fully disrupted, could their dark matter particles still dynamically heat the center
– 28 –

of the host halo effectively? The second is that the gravitational potential wells of cored
SIDM halos are shallower to begin with, which makes them potentially more susceptible to
additional disturbance by substructures [179]. In this work, we show that major disruptions
to the centers of SIDM halos can delay the onset of core-collapse, however, disturbances from
tidal stripping have been shown to accelerate the gravothermal evolution of SIDM subhalos
[76, 77, 80]. Additionally, [181] find that strong stellar feedback models can delay the onset
of core-collapse in high concentration halos, while weak feedback mildly accelerates core-
collapse. [181] also find that, for median concentration SIDM halos, stellar feedback at early
times can rapidly produce large, shallow cores during the core-formation phase. As a result,
we expect that the injection of energy through the accretion of dark subhalos at early times
might similarly accelerate core-formation in SIDM halos and lead to shorter core-collapse
timescales. We note that this process could also delay the onset of core-collapse in halos that
have low concentrations, or where the energy injected by subhalo accretion is sufficiently
large.
5
Conclusions
In this work we explore the distribution of DM at the centers of DM halos from three
high-resolution, zoom-in simulations run with the same initial conditions: Ms.Marvel DMO
(SIDM), Storm CDM DMO (CDM), and a hydrodynamic run of Storm (CDM +baryons).
Our SIDM model implements a velocity-dependent cross section of interaction which pre-
serves the predictions of CDM at large scales but naturally forms cores at lower masses,
reducing tensions with the “cusp-core” problem. We analyze the inner density slopes and
densities at the centers of DM halos at redshift zero, contextualizing our results with obser-
vations. By tracing these properties through time, we track the evolution of CDM and SIDM
halos and find evidence of core-collapse in 9 Ms.Marvel DMO halos. We use a parametric
model of gravothermal evolution to analytically calculate core-formation and core-collapse
timescales of our Ms.Marvel DMO halos, showing that our identification of core-collapsed
halos is reasonable. Using these analytic calculations we test different methods of identifying
core-collapsed SIDM halos and explore their dependence on radius of measurement. Our
results can be summarized as follows:
• Between halo masses of 109−10M⊙, predictions from Storm CDM+baryons and Ms.Marvel
DMO diverge, indicating that we may be able to distinguish between DM models at
these scales observationally (Figure 2). We find that SN feedback is only effective at
creating cores in the regime of strong feedback. In contrast, SIDM models can tune
the cross section of interaction such that SIDM halos are core-forming at lower masses
relative to current CDM+baryonic simulations. Core-collapsing halos have inner DM
density slopes that are steeper than −1.9, the lowest slope we measure in any Storm
CDM DMO halo. Observations of such centrally dense DM halos favor SIDM models
with high velocity-dependence and may help to rule out CDM.
• Core-formation takes place on shorter timescales in Ms.Marvel SIDM halos compared
to Storm CDM halos with baryonic feedback (Figure 3). In our core-collapsed sample
of halos from the Ms.Marvel DMO simulation, cores initially form during the first 6-8
Gyr of the halo’s lifetime, and then inner density slopes become steeper at later times
due to the onset of gravothermal collapse. In contrast, Storm CDM DMO halos are
generally cuspy throughout their lifetimes (Figure 4).
– 29 –

• We find that central density traces inner density slope in Ms.Marvel DMO halos (Fig-
ures 3 and 5) even in the case where the halo has initialized the core-collapse phase
as shown in Figure 7. As the cores of Ms.Marvel DMO halos begin collapsing, their
central densities grow to be several times denser and they have increasingly negative
inner density slopes, exceeding those of their Storm CDM DMO counterparts.
• Figure 8 indicates that, even in the initial stages of core-collapse, SIDM halos can
potentially have inner density slopes steep enough to be distinct from CDM.
• At radii of 0.5 kpc, which are large enough to be resolved by observers, we find that the
central densities in core-collapsed halos do not grow enough to be identifiable as having
core-collapsed (Figure 10). Additionally, we find that inner density slope changes less
with an increasing radius of measurement (Figure 10) and is a more accurate tracer of
core-collapse than central density (Figure 8). As a result, it may be easier to identify
core-collapsed halos observationally by the slope of their DM density profiles.
• We find that it is possible to characterize core-collapse even when the halo’s core is goes
below than the traditional resolution criterion. The radii of central DM density cores in
all but the most massive halos from our sample of Ms.Marvel DMO halos are generally
smaller than three times the gravitational softening length. However, the inner density
slopes and densities measured at or just above our spatial resolution threshold of 0.33
kpc still contain information about the behavior of DM at the very center of SIDM
halos.
5.1
Future work
Comparing observations with hydrodynamic runs of SIDM simulations will provide additional
insight to the particle nature of DM. As hydrodynamic runs of CDM simulations have shown,
incorporating baryonic feedback can drastically impact the distribution of DM at the centers
of halos, particularly those that host bright dwarf galaxies. We will robustly test our velocity-
dependent SIDM model in future runs with SIDM and baryons. Recent work indicates that
the inclusion of baryonic feedback may not yield significant differences in the measured inner
density slopes of Ms.Marvel DMO halos. [86, 182] show that the inner structure of SIDM
halos is not as sensitive to baryonic physics as CDM for halos ranging in mass between roughly
1010−13M⊙. Additionally, baryonic feedback processes take place on timescales larger than
the evolution timescale of isothermal cores formed in SIDM halos, which allows core-formation
to be dominated by the gravothermal evolution of SIDM halos. However, [183] find that
baryonic processes do contribute a small amount to establishing the density profiles of SIDM
halos. Future hydrodynamic runs of Ms.Marvel will test the sensitivity of core formation in
SIDM halos to baryonic processes as well as their impact on core-collapse timescales.
It is important to understand the role of baryons in SIDM simulations; for example,
recent work shows that including baryons can make cores smaller, where these effects are
most pronounced in baryon dominated galaxies [38, 98, 184]. [185] find that SIDM is more
robust to the inclusion of baryons than CDM in dwarf galaxies (M∗≈105.7−7.0M⊙), meaning
that it may be more difficult to constrain uncertain baryonic physics in SIDM simulations.
This added difficulty indicates that SIDM simulations may also reduce observable differences
that arise from variations in subgrid modeling. A full understanding of baryonic effects on
the gravothermal evolution of SIDM halos will be necessary to place constraints on the SIDM
cross section. Future work will focus on simulating SIDM halos with the inclusion of baryons.
– 30 –

The predictions made in this work may play a key part in constraining DM models with
upcoming and current surveys. The timescales of gravothermal core-collapse in SIDM halos
may also be used in future efforts to constrain the velocity-dependence of the cross section
of interaction. The velocity-dependence of the interacting cross section for SIDM particles
can be tuned such that only dwarf halos below a specific mass threshold will undergo core-
collapse by redshift zero. However, we find that the varied merger histories of SIDM halos
may impact their gravothermal evolution, with major mergers potentially delaying the onset
of core-collapse. Some previous work places constraints on the velocity-dependence of SIDM
using the density profiles of MW dwarf spheroidal galaxies [78, 186, 187].
As discussed
previously, environment may impact the gravothermal collapse of SIDM halos [80, 116–118,
172], indicating that it is necessary to also study the density profiles of isolated dwarfs to
constrain the velocity-dependence of SIDM.
A
Using central density as a measurement of core-collapse
Previous work studying collapse timescales for SIDM halos [80, 82, 121] commonly uses the
increase or growth in central density as a metric to identify core-collapse timescales. We
compare our results from this section with a different method for identifying halos in the
core-collapse phase using measurements of the growth of central density of the halo. Figure
12 recreates results from Figure 8, but now compares analytic predictions with a collapse
time based on the growth in central density. Halos are defined as core-collapsed if they have
central densities which are 1.5 times their minimum central density averaged within 0.35 kpc.
We measure the minimum central density of the halo once it has formed a core, making it
distinct from the halo’s initial central density. We define Tcoll as the time it takes for a halo
to reach this threshold for growth in central density. We find that 4 of the lowest mass halos
with core-formation timescales shorter than a Hubble time are not identified successfully.
Additionally, this method falsely identified two halos with collapse times far exceeding a
Hubble time. One of these halos has a late-time merger which accounts for the growth halo
in halo density, indicating that this metric is not robust to halo mergers.
In the Discussion we show that central density is extremely sensitive to the radius at
which it was measured, so accuracy will be improved with higher resolution or by eliminating
lower-mass halos from the sample.
Figure 12 compares the analytically predicted core-formation and core-collapse timescales
of Ms.Marvel halos against a core-collapse timescale identified by measuring the growth in
central density over time. We identify 10 Ms.Marvel halos with central densities that grow
by a factor of 1.5 over time, including two intermediate-mass halos (Mhalo ∼3 × 108M⊙)
that finish forming their cores at late times and are not predicted to fully collapse until
roughly 15 Gyr past the last timestep in the simulation.
Additionally, we identified the
7 halos with the shortest core-collapse times with halo masses greater than ∼2 × 108M⊙
as core-collapsing. This indicates that central density is sensitive to core-collapse in halos
that are sufficiently massive. However, at lower masses central density measurements falsely
identify 2 halos with core-collapse times exceeding 20 Gyr as core-collapsing. One of these
two halos is not predicted to collapse for over 103 Gyr, indicating that the growth in central
density must be caused by some mechanism other than core-collapse. By tracing this halo’s
merger history back in time we found that this halo had a late-stage merger that coincided
with a significant increase in central density. These results show that central density, as a
marker of core-collapse, is not robust to halo growth through mergers. Additionally, we find
– 31 –

Figure 12. Left side: Predicted core-formation timescales plotted against halo mass for our sample
of core-collapsed Ms.Marvel DMO halos. Blue triangles mark the time when the central density of a
Ms.Marvel DMO halo first reaches 1.5 times its minimum central density averaged within 0.35 kpc,
while colored circles represent the predicted core-formation timescales, calculated analytically from
a parametric model. Circles are colored by the maximum circular velocity of each halo. Black lines
link collapse timescales from predictions and times measured directly from simulations for the same
halo. The purple dashed line marks one Hubble time. Right Side: Predicted core-collapse timescales
plotted against halo mass, using the same notation as the left side.
that this method fails to identify 4 halos found to be core-collapsing in Figure 8. We note
that all of these halos are UFDs with halo masses Mhalo < 2 × 108M⊙, at these low masses
the central density increases very little at the radii we measure. We conclude that using the
growth in central density as a metric to identify core-collapsing halos is less accurate than
measuring the inner density slope, particularly for the lowest-mass halos in our sample.
B
Turndown in Central Density at Late Times
Figure 13 shows the evolution of the DM density profiles for halos 46, 146 and 164. These are
the three core-collapsed halos that experience a turndown in central density at late times. In
the left column of the figure we plot the central density traced through time where the central
density is divided by initial central density and calculated using the same methodology as in
Figure 7. The right column tracks the DM density profile of each halo through time, zooming
in on the inner regions of the halo. The density profile is smoothed by calculating density
from the mass enclosed profile. The gray shaded area extends out to a radius of 0.33 kpc
and marks where the profile is considered unresolved. The panels adopt the same color bar
with pink corresponding to late times and dark blue corresponding to early times.
In the top left panel of Figure 13 we show that during the initial phases of core-collapse,
the central density of halo 46 increases rapidly before reaching a plateau at around 10 Gyr.
Shortly after, we show that the central density begins to decrease. The top right panel of
Figure 13 shows that this unexpected turndown in DM density results from the process of
gravothermal core-collapse. As the inner DM halo grows denser and lower in mass, particles
get kicked out of the halo center in order for it to contract. Because we measure central
density at a fixed radius, as the halo contracts the central core shrinks to be inside of our
radius of measurement. This effect could be improved with higher mass resolution of DM
– 32 –

Figure 13. Left panel: Average central density within 0.35 kpc divided by initial average central
density traced through time. Dashed black line is the raw profile while the solid line is smoothed.
Right panel: Zoomed in DM density profiles plotted at different time-steps colored by time, with dark
blue corresponding to early times (high z) and pink corresponding to late times (low z). The gray
shaded region marks the region where the profile is unresolved, at radii less than 0.33 kpc. Halos 46,
148, and 164 are plotted in the top, middle, and bottom rows respectively.
particles. At the innermost regions of the halo profile the central density continues increasing
up to redshift zero. However, central density is defined in this work as the averaged density
of the DM halo within 0.33 kpc of the halo center. At this radius, the density of the DM
halo begins to decrease at late times in halos that have entered late stages of core-collapse.
We suggest that by increasing the mass resolution of our SIDM particles, we could more
confidently resolve the inner regions of our DM halos and measure central density at smaller
radii.
Similarly, we conclude from the middle and bottom rows of Figure 13 that the turndown
in central densities of halos 146 and 164 results from the same phenomenon demonstrated
previously in halo 46.
C
Resolution dependence on particle number
Simulations face various challenges accurately resolving the centers of ΛCDM halos within
one to a few times the softening length. For example, dynamical heating of DM particles at
the centers of halos causes slopes of central DM density profiles to become artificially shallow
– 33 –

Figure 14. Left side: Number of DM particles enclosed within a radius of R (kpc) plotted against
density contrast measured at that radius for Storm CDM DMO halos. Dark blue, purple, and pink
points represent the number of particles enclosed within 0.30, 0.33, and 0.39 kpc respectively. The
black line indicates the quantity of particles necessary to resolve a CDM halo for a given density
contrast as described by [134]. We note that [134] implement a CDM-based resolution criteria which
may have limited applicability in SIDM simulations. Right side: Number of DM particles plotted
against density contrast for Ms.Marvel SIDM DMO halos.
at these radii. However, [134] demonstrate that for CDM simulations it is important to also
consider the number of DM particles enclosed within a given radius and at a given density
contrast. They found that CDM halos with too few particles at their centers have artificially
low central densities. These artificially low central densities could result in shallower central
inner density slopes, making halos appear cored when they are not. The following section
tests the limits of spatial resolution in our simulations and justifies our adoption of r = 0.33
kpc as the smallest central radius that remains resolved for the CDM halos in our sample.
All Storm CDM DMO halos in our sample are well resolved within 0.33 kpc. We find
that, when applying the same resolution criteria trained on CDM simulations to SIDM halos,
the full sample of Ms.Marvel DMO halos only become resolved at radii equal to or greater
than 0.39 kpc. We identify resolved halos using criteria from [134] in Figure 14, which plots
the number of DM particles against the density contrast at a given radius for each Storm
CDM DMO or Ms.Marvel DMO halo. The density contrast ( ρ(r)
ρcrit ) is found by dividing the
DM density by the critical density of the universe, while the number of DM particles enclosed
within this given radius is plotted along the y-axis. Dark blue, purple, and pink points rep-
resent measurements for each halo within 0.30 kpc, 0.33 kpc, and 0.39 kpc, respectively.
The black line marks the minimum number of particles required for a halo to become fully
resolved for a given density contrast according to the criteria of [134]. Resolved halos lie
above this threshold and unresolved halos lie below. We derive this threshold by plotting
a straight line in log-log space between 100 particles with
ρ(r)
ρcrit = 104.5 and 3000 particles
with
ρ(r)
ρcrit = 106 [134]. Using this criterion, we find that only 39 of our 235 Storm CDM
DMO halos remain unresolved within 0.30 kpc. We note that for Ms.Marvel DMO halos, the
relationship between the number of DM particles and the density contrast is more scattered
relative to their CDM counterparts, and a larger number of halos are unresolved down to
smaller radii. Despite these key differences, the majority of Ms.Marvel DMO halos are also
resolved within 0.33 kpc.
– 34 –

Figure 15. Left panel: the DM density profiles of Halo 1 from the Ms.Marvel DMO simulation (the
most massive halo in our sample) traced through time. The radius is normalized by the virial radius
at each timestep and the evolution over time is illustrated by color, with pink profiles corresponding
to earlier times and darker blue profiles corresponding to late times. Middle panel: the DM density
profile of the most massive halo that we identified as undergoing core-collapse in our sample. Right
panel: a small halo that follows the average evolution track of core-forming SIDM halos in this mass
bin.
The resolution criteria published by [134] are derived using CDM simulations, meaning
that they do not consider how SIDM self-scattering may affect the number of DM particles
or the density within the centers of resolved halos. Without extensive resolution tests, it is
difficult to anticipate whether the same resolution criteria used in CDM simulations apply
to Ms.Marvel DMO halos. Because our entire sample of Storm CDM DMO halos is fully
resolved down to 0.33 kpc, we chose to adopt a universal spatial resolution limit of 0.33 kpc
for their Ms.Marvel DMO counterparts. Furthermore, SIDM halos in the advanced stages of
core-collapse face additional resolution challenges [121] and in these cases the central density
reached by the halo should be understood as a lower limit.
Previous literature has already shown that modeling SIDM halos in the advanced stages
of core-collapse poses many challenges [82–84, 137–139]. Some works have already introduced
recommendations for DM particle mass resolution [82, 83], gravitational softening lengths
[139], and time-stepping [139] which reduce errors in energy conservation and core-collapse
time. Future work extensively testing the resolution limits of simulated SIDM halos will
improve the implementation of SIDM models in simulations and reveal how simulation pre-
scriptions impact the behavior of SIDM halos.
D
Density Profiles of Ms.Marvel Halos
In Figure 15 we show three density profiles from the Ms.Marvel DMO simulation to illustrate
how the density profiles of SIDM halos evolve over time across different mass ranges. Halo
1 is the most massive halo in our sample of Ms.Marvel halos and is core-forming at redshift
zero. We see that in the left-most panel this halo forms its core at early times and has a
lowered central density. Halo 46 is a medium-mass halo in our sample, but is the highest-mass
halo that we identify as having entered the core-collapse phase. We see in the middle panel
that this halo begins forming a core before initializing core-collapse and becoming extremely
centrally concentrated at late times. In the right-most panel we show the evolution of halo
157, a low-mass halo from our sample that is core-forming at late times. We see that the
central core of this halo remains much smaller and less pronounced than more massive halos,
however, it is much less centrally dense and cuspy than the core-collapsed halos.
– 35 –

Acknowledgments
A.C.E. is supported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Future Investi-
gators in NASA Earth and Space Science and Technology (FINESST) (22-ASTRO22-0096).
FDM and BV acknowledge support from NSF grant PHY2013909.
FDM is grateful for
the hospitality of Perimeter Institute where part of this work was carried out. Research
at Perimeter Institute is supported in part by the Government of Canada through the De-
partment of Innovation, Science and Economic Development and by the Province of Ontario
through the Ministry of Colleges and Universities. This research was also supported in part
by the Simons Foundation through the Simons Foundation Emmy Noether Fellows Program
at Perimeter Institute. This research was supported in part by grant NSF PHY-2309135 to
the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics (KITP). AMB acknowledges support from NSF
grant AST-2306340, and by grant FI-CCA-Research-00011826 from the Simons Foundation.
AHGP acknowledges support from NSF grants AST-2008110 and AST-2510899. Some of the
simulations were performed using resources made available by the Flatiron Institute. The
Flatiron Institute is a division of the Simons Foundation. This work used Stampede2 at
the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) through allocation MCA94P0181642 from
the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services & Support (ACCESS)
program, which is supported by U.S. National Science Foundation grants 2138259, 2138286,
2138307, 2137603, and 2138296.
